Hi there. So we are here in the, uh, Siebel Center
for Computer Science which is the Department
of Computer Science at the University of Illinois
at Urbana-Champaign. This is the building
where I work and a lot of other, uh, students and a lot of other
faculty work, uh, here, in Computer Science. So, uh, here we are talking with, uh,
Professor William Gropp. And he is gonna tell us some
juicy pieces of information and opinions about, uh, uh,
what he works on and how that relates
to cloud computing, so, thank you for talking
with us, uh, uh, Bill. Uh, why don't you start
by saying a little bit about, uh, yourself? Sure, so, uh,
I am a-a professor here in the Department
of Computer Science. I've been here
for about seven years. Before that, I was a scientist
at Argonne National Lab, and before that I was, uh,
on the faculty at Yale. Uh, I've been doing what we call
high performance computing, uh, since I was a graduate student, and I think it's really cool
and exciting. Uh, one of the, uh, things I got
to do just last year was to be the general chair
of the biggest meeting in the high performance computing field which has a little
over 10,000 people attend. So it was a really exciting time in, uh, the Denver
convention center, and so. Uh, our field is very active,
uh, very vibrant, has a lot of cool opportunities, uh, and has a lot of overlap
with cloud computing, so I'm happy
to talk about it. Alright, so you mention high
performance computing, uh, w-can w-can you say a little about what high performance
computing is? Yeah, it's one of these things
that's sorta hard to define. It's like, you know
it if you see it. Uh, one way to define it is it's computing where performance is important. Uh, and then that's maybe
the broadest definition. Uh, definitions also used is that it's computing that involves supercomputers, or machines
that are like supercomputers. And so you could ask
what a supercomputer is. Uh, the definition of that
has also changed over time, but one way to define it is it's about the most expensive
computer you can buy. [Indy laughs] Um, it was once defined as a
machine that cost $12 million but there's
been inflation since then. Um, but a supercomputer is,
is a computer that, uh, allows you to tackle problems that are just oth-otherwise uh, out of reach, and a typical supercomputer
or computer of that class, is made up of thousands
to hundreds of thousands of the kind of fast processors you might find in a server node. What are the similarities or
the differences between high performance
computing and cloud computing, as you see cloud computing? So the, let me start
with the similarities. Um, in both cases,
you're taking advantage, uh, getting more performance by having large
numbers of processors that can attack some collection
of problems. Maybe a problem,
maybe a collection of problems. The- maybe
the biggest difference, between high performance computing and cloud computing and this is a difference that is, uh, definitely
a shade of gray, is that in high
performance computing, well, first, as I mentioned, the, uh, focus on performance, is quite important. Many high performance computing
problems require the, uh, coordinated work
of all of those processors on this same problem
at the same time. Uh, high performance
supercomputers tend to have, uh, very high performance networks that have low latency
and high bandwidth and these networks are
significantly more powerful than the ones you find
in the cloud system, there're also significantly
more expensive. [laughs] But they're needed for
the kind of tight coordination. I often use a-a symphony
orchestra sort of analogy. The kind of programs that we run
in high performance computing are often like symphonies, in they have to be
well-coordinated. Y'know, maybe not
by a single director, but they have to work
very closely together. In fact, uh, anybody who's a
m-musician knows that, uh, even the stage
for a symphony orchestra has to be defined well so that the musicians
can hear each other well, and keep things coordinated. Um, clouds can do that
under some circumstances, but they're much more optimized towards independent work that's, um, less
frequently coordinated; it's not uncoordinated,
but less frequently. And so you don't have to, uh,
have the same tight control of what's going on. And so, these communities, uh, HPC, high performance
computing community and the cloud
computing committee, um, are sort of, they sound
very similar to each other from what you're describing. Can they learn from each other
in terms of techniques? Uh, uh, I think they can. Uh, and definitely
in both directions. So, it's interesting there was a recent paper
from people at Google, where they had discovered stuff about, uh, performance
irregularities in codes that we have known
in high performance computing for decades. Uh, and we also have solutions
for the those problems. [laughs] Uh, at the same time, uh, um, the access model
that clouds provide is something
that I find an increasing number of computational scientists
clamoring for, the ability to get resources
on demand that scale to the size
of their problem, uh and that's requires
a different way of thinking about how you
provide the access. Um, I think also the, uh, a lot
of high performance computing has been designed
around applications that take advantage of the fact that each of those
compute elements runs at the same speed
as the other ones. Uh, this is no longer true, although, uh, a lot
of applications still think that it is, and it's going to become
less true over time. And this is exactly
the sort of situation that cloud systems are already
operating in, and so, they, um, they've looked at that from some different viewpoints. And finally, another issue that
has been coming up as we're looking at taking
extreme scale computing and high performance computing, uh, beyond where
we're at now to systems that are a hundred or a thousand times faster than current systems is that it's gonna become
increasingly difficult to require that the system
be completely reliable. And, another thing is that, uh, has been developed
in cloud systems is, uh, exploiting cheaper,
less reliable components, which made sense there, but in the scientific computing you don't need to go cheaper. But as we looked
at the extreme scale systems, it's gonna be
increasingly expensive to be, the sort of ultra-light
reliable that you need. And so again,
there's an area where what's going on
in cloud computing will offer some insights,
maybe not to solutions, because the problems
have different characteristics, but some insights
on how to attack them. So can you say
a little bit about, uh, what kinds of research problems
you are working on now? Sure, so, they're really
in-in two groups, so, one of them is
a computational science problem. So, I'm the lead PI for, uh, the Center on Plasma
Coupled Combustion, here, which is funded
by the Department of Energy. What it's looking at is trying
to understand, uh, what is, uh, really a new way
to control combustion by using plasmas and you might use this
to, uh, hold onto the flame in a hypersonic jet engine. Where one of the big problems is that the fact
that it's hypersonic means that it's very hard to keep
the flame from being blown out. Plasma gives you a way
to hold onto the flame. Uh, also allows you to guide
where the combustion happens, so you might be able
to make a far cleaner, more efficient burning
internal combustion engine. But the problem is, that, uh, no-one really knows
what's-how that works. You know, you can do it
in a lab, uh, set up a little experiment and we can do that here, it's really great, and it's part
of our, uh, project as we have people
who do these experiments. We can set them up
and they can do them and they can measure stuff, but if you want to design, uh,
an engine that uses this, um, you need to have some
insight into what's going on. You need to be able to do
predictions about, uh, how effective it's going to be, you need something to help you optimize the design, and for that,
we-we do this by computing, and the kind of computing that's required
for this is enormous, because you hafta understand
what's happening on link scales that
you can see in your hand, and you need to understand
what's happening at link scales which are the atoms bouncing off
the electrodes that are creating the plasma, and everything in between. And that's a problem that's too
big for any one, uh, processor, or even ten or a
hundred processors. And so, in fact, the Department
of Energy is interested in this, less because of the science,
although it's interesting, but more because
they're interested in understanding the techniques both computer science techniques the applied math techniques to handle problems
of this complexity, which are really at-at the, uh,
at the edge of what we can do. And then, the other part
of my research is focused on say, the computer science part of that, which is, how do I express
those programs? Uh, how do I write the programs
so that it's efficient, and it has to be efficient,
on an individual node, and it has to be efficient running across a hundred thousand
or a million nodes. And, um, I think you'll be
asking me a little more about that later,
so I'll-I'll wait for that. But that's the two parts
of my research at this time. Okay, um, let's move on
to a different topic, uh, MPI, which is pretty close
to your heart, uh. You are of course,
one of the inventors of this very popular
programming paradigm, MPI. Can you say a little
about what MPI is? Sure, so, MPI's, um,
very boringly stands for Message Passing Interface. Uh, it's a, uh,
standard, if, well, maybe sometimes called
an ad hoc standard because it wasn't an official
organization behind it. Uh, but it's a ad hoc standard that codifies communicating sequential processes. Uh, at least it started
like that. Over time it's added
more and more, uh, techniques for doing the kind
of parallel computing that we do
in high performance computing. So one of the features of MPI
is it's designed for reliable systems, designed for systems,
uh, at very large scale, and I'll say a little bit about
what that means in a minute, uh, and it's designed
for, uh, systems that need to get
the utmost in performance, um, out
of their applications. Um, it's not a high level,
easy to use necessarily model. But it's been a very powerful
and very flexible one. Uh, and astoundingly, it's now
over 20 years old, which, uh, even I have trouble
believing at times. Uh, never expected it
to succeed so well. Um, to give everyone a sense of,
um, the scale which it's used, there are MPI programs now that typic-that run
on over a million processors. [laughs] Uh, so it scales, y'know,
well past what, uh, current cloud systems look like. Uh, the cost
of moving data from, uh, user process to user process
in this message passing model is typically on the order
of a microsecond or less on, uh, a HPC system, and the bandwidths
for the data that's being moved, uh, exceeds y'know, on this-on the-the slowest systems it's several hundred
megabytes per second, and, uh, exceeds gigabytes per
second, uh, on the best systems. Uh, and the bisection band,
with the ability of, um, say, half the-half
of those million processes taught the other
half a million processes, uh, is often, on today's systems
well over a terabyte per second, uh, and all of that is
achievable, uh, with MPI, and MPI programs
that were written 20 years ago, some of them are still running
today and doing good science, which, um, I think speaks to the flexibility and
generality of the design. And is MPI, would you say MPI
is applicable in, uh, data centers,
and clouds as well? Can the programming model
be used just as easily there? Yes, it is, and I mean, I run
MPI programs on my laptop. The-one assumption
that MPI makes, that is maybe awkward
for some cloud systems, is it does assume that there's
reliable communication layer, um, and it doesn't have
built in facilities to deal with, uh,
a lack of reliability, um, so that's an issue. It also, uh, tends to assume a
static group of processes, uh, although there are
features in it to add and subtract processes, but I would say
that they're weaker than what you might want
if you were doing it a lot. But, uh, for example,
the reduction operation that you might have talked
to people about, uh, MPI provides a number
of different versions of that, depending on how
you are doing your reduction. And those reduction, uh,
im-those reduction operations and the algorithms behind them
had been tuned over the decades, to be very, very fast, um, there's some very clever
ways to do that. The same is true
for the sort of reverse of that to do a broadcast, um, we can, um, move data from one process
to all other processes, uh, pretty much at that
terabyte per second rate. But, and it sounds like from
what you are saying, that MPI could be combined with
things like membership services, which already exist, had to-to build a system that would be oriented
more towards clouds? Absolutely. Absolutely. And there are people who were
running MPI on clouds now, so it's not, uh, something
that's terribly strange. The, uh, the biggest thing
is not so much MPI, but the kind of applications that are written with MPI that, as I mentioned before,
tend to assume, uh, uniform performance
of their computing elements. What were the motivating factors behind coming up with the paradigm in the first place? So the, uh, the situation when
um, MPI was developed was that there were
a number of vendors, uh, large and small, so, um, start-up companies, um,
IBM, uh, Intel, uh, and they all had their own APIs, their own
programming interfaces. Uh, mostly built around
this communicating, sequential processes model, message processing model, um, for writing these programs. And, uh, Ken Kennedy is well
known in parallel computing, particularly in, uh, compilers, was working on a par-, uh, compiler for a parallel language and he wanted
to just have one API for, for, as a compiler target. And he got a bunch
of us together, so us, meaning people
who were developing one of these
different interfaces. And we all explained why they
all had to be different, and Ken, uh, said,
this is great, looks like we're all
in agreement that we can find
a common standard. Um, this is sort of
a mark of a great man, who, uh, uh, and he was right.
[laughs] Um, so over the next, uh, year,
or so, uh, a proposal was made, uh, many of us reacted
to the proposal by saying we have to do
better than this. Um, and I'm, should say,
it was not a bad proposal, but it wasn't good enough. And a lot of people
got together, uh, the vendors
sent their best people, um, the research group
sent their best people, some application groups, uh, who had the same
sort of desire that Ken did, they wanted to s- you know,
they wanted to put their time into writing
a better application, not importing
from system to system. And over about a year
and a half, we came up
with a s- uh, standard, and as part of that, I had committed my group to developing and implementation, so as we were
developing the standard we had something that
ran, that we could, explore and experiment with and make sure we were making
the right choices. And, uh, that came up with what
became the MPI1 standard, um, we took advantage of, uh, people who had been working
on the standard for high performance FORTRAN, which was another
ad hoc standard. Uh, we even used the same hotel
in north Dallas which really encouraged you
to s- um, stay there and work. [laughs] Um, and, we developed
a careful standard. We got it published. It was published by, uh,
International Journal of High Performance
Computing Applications. Um, we made it freely available so, uh, you can
download the pdf, and you can do that now,
with MPI3, you can go
to the MPI-forum.org website and get the standard, so, we don't charge
any-anything for it. And the- um, there was also
an implementation available, and, uh, with that,
people could start using it. We also wrote, uh some books,
there's Using MPI, Using MPI2. Um, Using MPI is
in its second edition, and its third edition was sent to the
publisher last month. Um, another, um, thing that's
hard to, uh, hard to believe sometimes that it's
been around that long. Uh, and that produced a standard that applications people could start programming to and that meant that they had,
they could no longer they no longer had to worry
about, um, spending time every time a new parallel
machine came out, moving their code to it. And, because we had in,
had a very open process, the meetings were open, because we involved
application developers, as well as the vendors
and as well as people who were doing research into these parallel
programming systems, we made sure that the design was fast, efficient,
and complete enough so that over the years
the application, uh, developers have not really
needed anything else. They made one
and a few other things, and there is an MPI2
and an MPI3, both of which have added
features, but by and large, uh, applications
have been able to write whatever they needed to in MPI. And that's different than
some other efforts where, for example, uh,
what was provided was what the people
doing the development provided, but it wasn't,
it didn't have the breadth, didn't have the completeness that was needed
by the applications. Sounds like, uh, standardization was one of the
motivating factors for the development of MPI. I-i-it was, and I-I wanna say
that it wasn't the first effort to standardize this kind
of parallel programming. Um, eh, one-one challenge
for people is standardization sounds great,
sounds like, uh, you would, it's amazing
the number of people who wanted
to standardize something because they look
at the success of MPI and they want
to duplicate that success. Uh, but what they forget was, that there were several efforts to standardize message passing before MPI that failed. Um, and it's important to have
a mature enough system, a mature enough community
of understanding the issues, before you start
to standardize, um, but yeah. Once you have that knowledge, then it's time
to standardize and move on. Well, um, that's the last
question I have for you. Thank you for, uh, taking
time to talk with us. It's my pleasure. Thanks, Bill.