[MUSIC] This week, we first start off
by discussing Key-value and NoSQL Storage Systems which are very
important component of today's cloud computing systems. This new generation of
cloud storage systems, NoSQL Systems is quickly replacing
the traditional relation of databases. We'll see how these new systems
are different from traditional databases, we'll see how these new
systems are designed. We'll see the insides of these
systems in an under the hood look and we'll also see apache Cassandra and
hBase in detail. These are two of the systems
that are very popular, in fact probably the most popular most
sequence storage systems in use today. We've also seen many of the building
blocks that you have seen so far, including gossip and
membership come together and be used in a real system as we
study systems like Cassandra. That's the first focus of this week. Later on in this week, we will start
a topic called Time and Ordering. Why we study this topic is
the distributed systems, as I've mentioned before very early in
the course need to deal with time or rather the lack of synchronization
among servers and clients. Remember that one of the characteristics
of a distributed system when we defined it was asynchrony which means that servers
and clients are each running their own clock and these clocks are not
synchronized with each other. They show different times and
they're running at different rates. So we'll first see techniques to
synchronize the clocks of these servers and clients with each
of the time synchronization. Then we'll see techniques to assign time
stamps to events that does not need time synchronization. And these logical time
stamps are a very important core concept in distributed systems
that are used in today's cloud systems, that have been used for
many decades in this distributed systems. And it will continue to be used in future
generations of distributed systems. So this topic of Time and
Ordering also marks the beginning of our deep dive into theoretical concepts that
underlie cloud and distributed systems. And these are very important concepts. [MUSIC]