Hi everyone, this is Aishwarya. And today we are going to be talking
about different consistency models. So in the previous lectures we talked
about eventual consistency, but it turns out that there are many more
consistency models that are out there, and so we are going to be talking
about some of them today. Before we go into that, let's see, what exactly do we mean by
a consistency model, right? A consistency model is nothing but the
contract between the distributed system and the end application or the application
development developer, right? And it basically dictates what results
the system can return upon an operation. So in a distributed system, you would have multiple concurrent clients
that are interacting with the system, doing reads and
writes on the multiple copies, right? So on the right here, we have such
a distributed system where we have three copies of an object and these objects
actually have different values and concurrent clients
are interacting with the system. So depending upon like how these
operations are performed on these replicas, the guarantee that the system
offers would vastly differ, right? And consistency model exactly
dictates what those guarantees are. And specifically it dictates what
values can different operations return, like how these different
operations are ordered, how they are performed on these replicas,
what values they return. And these are all dictated by
the consistency model that the system provides. So it's basically the contract that
the system needs to adhere to. So the system developer can design or
implement the system in any way, they can optimize it in any way as long
as it doesn't violate the contract. And the application developer needs to
understand clearly what the contract is so that they can develop their
application in a correct manner. Okay, so it turns out that there are many
different consistency models out there. In fact, it's a spectrum. So on the left you have
the weakest consistency model, which is eventual consistency. And as you go towards
the right on the spectrum, the consistency guarantees that the system
offers become better and better. So at the right you have strong
consistency models like even, sorry, sequential consistency or
linearizability. So what's the catch? As you move towards the right
of the spectrum, although you get strong consistency guarantees,
the performance of the system gets worse. And more importantly,
the availability that you get, especially when there's a partition,
is much worse. So for example, the consistency models
on your right, like linear stability and sequential consistency, are not
available when there is a partition. Whereas eventual consistency,
because it's a weak guarantee, we'll exactly talk about
what the guarantee is. But because it's a very weak guarantee,
the system can provide very good performance and
availability in the presence of partition. Okay, so first,
let's talk about eventual consistency. So Cassandra offers eventual consistency,
right? Which is the system that we saw earlier. Cassandra is actually based on an earlier
system from Amazon called dynamo. So eventual consistency dictates
that if writes to a key stop, then at that point all the replicas
of the key should converge. Basically they should all be identical and
have the same values for that key, right? So what that means is when clients
are interacting with the system, and let's say they're trying to read
the value of a particular key, the read could return any
of the older values, right? It need not necessarily return the latest
write that was performed to the key. So let's look at that with an example,
right, so here you have client C1, which performs a write to key x,
and it's updating x to one, right? And basically we have like sort of
a timeline here where we have two bars. The bar on the left indicates when the
operation was initiated by the client, so indicated by rec. And then the bar on the right basically
indicates the point at which the client received the response and
the operation completed, right? So that's what we mean
by this representation. So you have the request from the left and
then the response on the right, and the operation spans throughout from
the request to the response, right? So this is something that we'll
be using throughout this lecture. Now let's say we have another client C2,
which tries to update x to 2. And then let's say you have client C3,
which well after client one received the response for
the first write, initiates a read. In eventual consistency,
you could actually see an older value. Let's say x was initially zero,
so this read could return zero. Now let's suppose that another client C4,
tries to read x, right? And it's doing this well after both
the updates from C1 and C2 have completed, the system could still return zero. So as you can see, this is like a very
big guarantee that the system offers. So why do systems want to offer this,
right? That's because eventual consistency
is very performant, and eventual consistency also offers
very good availability guarantees. So in particular, eventual consistency, the system can allow
mini concurrent writes. Basically, different replicas could be
updated by different clients concurrently. You don't have to do
a lot of coordination. And what that means is that even if there
is a partition and some replicas are not reachable, the system could be available
in both the partitions, right? So a system that offers eventual
consistency is basically in the spectrum of availability and
partition tolerance and cap. So it doesn't give you strong consistency. So one thing to note with eventual
consistency is that a system that is providing eventual consistency should have
a way for merging concurrent rights or resolving conflicts when you have
concurrent rights to the same object. So for example here, right, like c one, let's say it's updating one replica and
of x and updating it to one. C2 is updating a different replica and
updating to two. So how do you eventually ensure that
both these replicas converge and have the same values? So you need to be able to resolve
between concurrent versions or conflicting object versions. Different systems use
different ways to do that. Like for example, in Cassandra it uses
the latest timestamp wind policy. So basically each update is
associated with the timestamp. So in Cassandra it's the timestamp of
the coordinator when the operation was performed. And you can basically to resolve
conflicts between two versions, you just compare the timestamps
of these two versions and just pick which one is the latest
as the latest version. And that would be the version that would
eventually survive on all the replicas, right? Okay, now let's talk
about strong consistency. So strong consistency models
are the other end of the spectrum, and linearizability is one of the strongest
consistency models that are out there. In fact, this is what we refer to
when we mean strong consistency. This is the C in the cap theorem. So, in linearizability, intuitively,
each operation that's performed by a client is instantaneously in real
time, visible to all the other clients. More formally, in linear accessibility, all the operations that are performed by
different clients are ordered in such a way that the order respects
the real time ordering of operations. So the total order of all the operations
respects the real time ordering of operations. So for example, if operation A completes
and then another operation B begins, then A is ordered before B. So for example, here you have two
operations, one from client C1 and another from client C3. And the read happens in
real time after the write. What that means is the read should
be ordered after the write, and it should see the fx of the write. So the read should here return
the value of the write. It will return one. Now, what if there
are concurrent operations? For example here, let's say you have
another client C2 issuing a write x of 2. Then these two operations from c two and
c three are concurrent to each other. Then in linearizability you could
order them in any way as long as the total order is valid in
the sequential order, right? So you could either order in this example,
c3 s read before c2s or after. If let's say you were to order
the c3 read before c2 strike, then c3 read here would return one. If you were to order it after c2 straight,
then it would return two. But both are valid in linearizability. Let's extend this example. Let's say you had another client c4,
which again issues a read. And this read is happening in
real time after c1 right, and it's also happening in real
time after c3 is write. So this read from c three and
the read from c four can both return one. That's valid because both c3 read and
c four's read are concurrent to c2. So you can order them in any way. So you could order here in this example
when both of them are returning once they have ordered ct read and
c4 read before c2 straight. Let's suppose you have
ordered c three's read after c2 write, so
c3 is returning two on that read. Now, what should c4 return
on the read to x for it to be valid under linearizability? So let's see this example in more detail. Note that C force read as being in
real time happening after c3 suite. So it should be ordered after c3 suite, which means that you have to see two,
you cannot see one. So that's what we mean by the total
order in linearizability, such that it respects the real
time ordering of operations. Okay, this is a very strong guarantee. Makes it so
that the distributed system appears as if there is just single copy in the system. So it hides in some way the fact that
things are replicated from the end applications, but it rates of some
performance and availability. So you cannot have a system that
provides both strong consistency, that is, linearizability, and be
available in the presence of partitions, we have another strong consistency model,
which is sequential consistency. So sequential consistency was
introduced by lamput, and here's the definition that lamput gives. I'm not going to read that. So in sequential consistency two,
all the operations are totally ordered, but the total order just respects the
local order of operations at the clients. But it doesn't respect the linear real
time ordering like linear accessibility, right? So sequential consistency is
definitely weaker than linearizability. So you could have stale reads
in sequential consistency. Because in sequential consistency,
if a client performs a write and then there is a read much after that,
and that happens in a different client, then you don't need to see
the result of the write. If both of these are happening in the same
client, then you need to see the results of that write in the second read because
you need to respect the client order in sequential consistency, but
it's still strong compared to many models. So let's look at the same
example from the previous slide. So we had these four clients where
these clients are performing different operations. Remember in the previous slide I
told that when the client c four is performing the read, it can only return
to in sequential consistency you could see any of the previous reads,
because in the total order you could order c four much before c1s and
c2s and c3s read. That's a valid total order that respects
the local order at different clients, because all the clients
just have one operation. So you could order. Basically there is nothing tricky
here when it comes to local order, and that's a valid total order. You don't, you can just order c four
much before c one, c two and c three. And that's a valid total order that
is spec sequential consistency. But this wouldn't respect linearizability. Now let's look at a slightly
different example. So we have again two clients. Client one is performing
a write updating x1, and it's performing a read to y, and
client two is performing a write to y and updating it to one, and
it's also performing a read to x. Now what can these two reads return? These two reads can very well return one. So basically they can both
return the latest values. Can they both return
zero at the same time? For example, let's say the first client, the read at the first client to
y returns zero under sequential consistency, can read to
x at client c2 return 0. So in sequential consistency you cannot
return zero, you have to return one. Here. This is because you have already
ordered the read operation at C1 before the write operation at C2,
because the write of write where you update y equal to
one is not reflected by the read. The read is still returning
the older value zero. So you have already ordered C1 write and
c one's read before C2 write. So you have because you have to
respect the local order at clients. The read at c two should appear
after the write at c two, but the write at c two is ordered after
the write and read at c one, which means that the read Athenae c two should
see the effects of the write at c one. So we have looked at the different
consistency models at the ends of the spectrum. So you have linear accessibility,
which gives you very good guarantees, which makes it actually very
easy to program against. So it makes the job of the application
developer much easier when the system is providing linear accessibility, but
it comes at the cost of performance and availability. But if you have a system that
offers eventual consistency, although it's offering you good
performance and availability guarantees, it can be sometimes very hard to program
against because the application developer has to now deal with all the weird
behavior from eventual consistent systems because it could return any of the older
values when there are concurrent writes happening in the system. So people have come up with many other
consistency models that are stronger than eventual consistency, but still offer some good performance and
availability guarantees. So it makes the job of
the application developer easier, but while still not sacrificing
availability and performance. So we're going to take a look at some
of those models next in this slide. So now let's take a look
at causal consistency. So in causal consistency there
is no total order of operations, unlike even strong consistency models like
linearizability or sequential consistency. As a result, Causal consistency is
actually much more available under partitions. It's a weaker model than the strong
consistency model that we looked at, but it still avoids many inconsistencies
that happen with eventual consistency. This is because in causal consistencies, operations respect the partial order
of causality between operations. So what operations
are causally related exactly? So operations that are from
the same client are costly related. And if a client C1 performs a write,
and then let's say a different client, C2, performs a read, and this read sees
the effect of the write and then the read becomes causally related to that write,
and causality is also transitive. Let's look at it from an example. So let's say you have an operation
from C1 updating x equal to 1. Let's say you have another read at C2,
and then this read observes the effect of that write, then the read and the write
becomes costly related to each other. Now, let's say C2 performs another
write of updating y equal to 1. Now let's say there is a read at c three. This read can return either zero or one. There is no restriction on this read
that's dictated by causal consistency. So this read is free to
return either zero or one. Now let's suppose there is another
read at c three which is reading y and it returns one. Now again, you have a causality
between the right updating y equal to 1 and this read,
that is reading 1 at C3. Because of transitive nature of causality,
C1's right of x equal to 1 and C3's read of y equal to 1 become
causally related to each other in that this read should come after
that write to respect causality. Now, let's suppose that
there is a read to x at C3. What should c three return? The read at c three should return one. Here. This is because this read
is causally related to the write of x equal to 1
that happened at C1, right? Because of causality is transitive,
you inherited the causality, right? So this read at c three,
the last read at c three is costly, related to the write at c one,
so it should return one so it cannot return any old value like zero. So that's causal consistency. So in the spectrum,
causal consistency is much more stronger than eventual consistency because
it respects causality and orders costly related operations in
a manner that always respects causality. But it still doesn't provide you with a
total order like sequential consistency on linear stability, but it's much more
available compared to those two models. There are also, other models that
people have proposed in the past, and there is a bunch of models, in fact, and all of them together are called
session based consistency models. So we have many session
consistency models, the first of which is monotonic reads. Intuitively, monotonic reads dictate
that reads cannot go back in time. So, for example,
if a client issues a read R1, and then let's say it issues another read R2. And then let's say you observe
some state on r1, you can. On R2, you cannot observe
a state that's older than R1. So you have to at least observe
the state at least as latest as R1, which essentially means is that your
reads cannot go back in time, okay? Then you have something
called monotonic writes. That essentially means that if
a client issues a write W1, and then let's say it performs another
write W2, then all the other clients in the system should see the fx
of W1 before it sees the fx of W2, right? So that's monotonic rights, and you have another session consistency
model that is called read my writes. In read my writes,
if let's say a client issues a write W1, and then the same client issues R1,
then R1 should see the effects of W1. So basically, if there is a write
operation and a read operation, and both of them are happening
in the same client session, this read operation should return what the
write set or something later than that, right, it should see the effects of this,
right? So that's what read my rights dictates. So many practical systems provide
some of these guarantees, and these are referred to together as
session-based consistency models. And all of these models are still
available in the presence of partitions. So that's the good thing
about these models, but they are still much stronger
than eventual consistency, because in eventual consistencies,
your reads could go back in time. Your writes need not be ordered in
the way that it respects the order in which writes were performed
in a client session, or your writes need not
see your latest write. So, in a way that these three models are
stronger than eventual consistency, but it's difficult to compare
these models with each other. So in some sense, they are like,
this is only a partial order, this is not a total order, right? The order of different consistency
models is just a partial order. So these three session-based models
are stronger than eventual, but with respect to each other,
they are not comparable. Causal consistency is stronger than all
of these three session-based models. In the recent years, researchers and
practitioners have proposed newer consistency models and we're going to
take a look at a few of them now. So, the first is CRDT, or
Commutative Replicated Data Types. This is actually not
a consistency model as such, but CRDT is referred to a class of data
structures that have a certain property. In particular, all the write operations to CRDT data
structures commute with each other. So what does that mean? That means that if you have two write
operations to the same data structure, it doesn't matter the order in which
you execute these two operations, they will always produce the same result. For example, let's say you have a CRDT
data structure, which is a simple integer. And let's say the operation that's
allowed on it is just an increment by 1. Let's say you have two clients, C1 and C2. C1 performs an increment by 1, C2
performs an increment by 1 again, right? It doesn't matter how you order these
two operations from the clients. You could order client one's operation
first and then client two or you could order client two and
then client one. Then result is the same,
the value is incremented by two. So that's the power of
commutative data structures. So where this helps is that,
the system when the data structure it's implementing CRDT, it doesn't
need to worry about consistency. Specifically, it need not worry
about resolving conflicts, because no matter the perform order
in which you perform the operations, the end result is going to be the same. You just need to ensure that all
the replicas perform all the operations. You don't have to worry about
resolving conflicts and to figure out which is the final value
the replica should hold, and so on, right? So this makes the system
development much easier. So that's the power of CRDTs. Related to CRDTs is the notion
of red-blue consistency. So researchers realized that it's often. Often not the case that all operations
commute with each other, right? Only some of them might commute with
each other while the rest do not. So, they realized that you could
rewrite client transactions and separate them into two
classes of operations. One they called red operations, and
the other they called blue operations. Blue operations are nothing but
operations that commute with each other. And so, they can be executed simply in
any order across different data centers. Whereas red operations
are much more stringent, and they cannot be executed in any order. So, red operations,
necessarily should be executed in the same order across
all the data centers. So, this red/blue consistency
essentially is a composite model, right? You have some operations,
that is blue operations, which are eventually consistent,
and then you have some operations which are red operations that
are strongly consistent. So, you can basically put together
a system that has strong consistency for summer operations and
eventual consistency for some operations. So, you get to have the most performance
for those blue operations and the most consistency for
the red operations. Now we have also some
staleness related models. The first one is bounded staleness. In bounded staleness, it's guaranteed
that the system will not return data that's more than K versions or
more than T time units would. For example, clients would specify
the value for K and T and ask for data that's not more than K versions or
T time units older. Then you have probabilistically
bounded staleness or PPS, where in this consistency model there
is an expected bound on the staleness that the system can return both
with respect to versions or time. So, here you could imagine having
SLA-type consistency guarantees. In the system, in 99% of the cases would
not return a version that's more than K versions old or return a data that's
more than T time units older, right? So, these are some new consistency models. I've taken this figure from a recent
survey paper that surveys different consistency models and tries to produce a partial order
of all the consistency models. So, this is actually the whole
consistency spectrum. And we have looked at some of
the points in the spectrum, but there are also many more
models that we haven't discussed. Okay, so we have looked at these
many different consistency models. So, how should you choose the right type
of consistency model for your application? Basically, you choose the lowest
consistency model that is required for the correctness of the application, because that gives you
the fastest availability, right? You don't want to get any stronger
than that or any weaker than that. So, that brings us to
the end of this lecture. Thank you.