In this, uh, lecture
we'll see a little bit and just take a peek into some
of the, uh, uh, implementations of gossip that exist out there. I'll give you a list and I'll give you a peek
into one of them. So, uh, we have discussed a lot
of theories so far for gossip, and I'm sure some of you are
wondering, uh, is this all a bunch of equations or are there
implementations yet. Well, there's a bunch of
implementations out there starting from the 1980s when, um, Xerox used, uh, um, gossip in their, um, uh, email and
database transactions systems. Uh, the Clearinghouse and
Bayou projects, uh, had, um, gossip-based protocols
running inside of them where essentially the servers, uh, would talk with ea- the e-mail servers would talk with each other and exchange
gossip messages, uh, which then they would,
uh, help, uh, to make sure that every one-every one of the servers received all the emails
that had been sent out. Um, this is sort of similar
to the NNTP protocol that I'll describe
on the next slide. The refDBMS system
also used gossip. Bimodal Multicast, uh, um, uh,
which was published in the late '90s, uh, a-and has continued, uh,
were from Cornell University, um, uh, brought back gossip, uh, to be used in fast
multicast implementations. Sensor networks
and wireless networks have also used,
uh, uh, uh, gossip. Uh, the Amazon web services
cloud infrastructure is rumored to use, uh, gossip,
uh, to, uh, uh, uh, to exchange messages
among the servers in both the EC2
and the S3 cloud. Again, this is rumored: none of the, uh, none of the,
uh, design details have actually been
published at all, but this is rumored and actually if you look
at the, um, uh, the postmortems from Amazon web
services outages, you will, uh, see that
some of the outages refer to gossip messages
and the use, uh, thereof. Uh, key-value stores
such as Cassandra, uh, also use gossip
for maintaining membership lists among the, um, uh, knowns
in the system. And the NNTP, the Network News
Transport Protocol, which is used in news groups, uh, which have been fairly
active for many, many decades, uh, which is a usenet NNTP
protocol, also use gossip. Uh, so essentially
in that NNTP protocol, each client uploads
and downloads news posts from a news server, uh, then the servers talk
with each other and exchange
the latest news posts so that every server
has all the posts. So, an upstream server might,
uh, um, send a message to the downstream server saying
"why don't we check these, uh, "message IDs that I
have received recently." Downstream server checks
the ones that, uh, it has not received and sends
back, uh, a message saying: "Why don't you give me those missing messages." And upstream then server sends a
"take this," uh, uh, message, followed by the action
messages themselves. Then the downstream
server acknowledges. And this is going on all the
time among the servers, in NN-among NNTP servers,
and so eventually, um, all the servers receive, uh,
all the messages. Of course, messages
always keep coming and so essentially the group
of servers is always, uh, in a wave, and that wave
is always, um, uh, lagging behind
the actual wave of messages and is always trying
to catch up. If the messages stop at any
point of time, uh, then, uh, the servers catch up
and they, um, uh, have the same set
of messages as each other, um, and, uh, the servers
and the NNTP implementation also, uh, uh, uh, um, delete
the posts after a while, uh, so, after the, you know,
the-the-after all the clients have in fact downloaded
the posts themselves so the servers are not keeping
the posts around forever. So that concludes our
discussion of, uh, gossip. Uh, gossip is a solution
to the multicast problem in, uh, uh, uh, large groups
of nodes or processes. Um, there are many tree-based
multicast protocols, and also some clients multicast
protocols that are out there, but they don't scale
as well as gossip, they're not as fault tolerant as, uh, gossip. Gossip is also known
as epidemics, essentially this is using, uh, the phenomenon
of rumor-spreading or, uh, disease-spreading or
spreading of worms in internet, uh, for a good purpose here: uh, to spread,
uh, multicast messages among large groups
of processes fairly quickly, fairly, uh, fault tolerantly, fairly reliably, and in a very scalable
and also topology-aware manner.