Hi. So, in this lecture, uh, we'll,
uh, continue our discussion and start, uh, talking about, uh, how to schedule
such an application, uh, which consists
of essentially a DAG of jobs. Remember that each job is
highly parallelizable into tasks over here so each of these nodes
can be split up into multiple parallel tasks. How do you schedule this, um,
across multiple sites in the grid infrastructure? How do you allocate
resources, uh, to it? So, uh, the grid typically uses a two level
scheduling infrastructure at, um, uh, each site is running
an intrasite protocol. For instance, Wisconsin
might be running a protocol known as HT, uh, Condor,
or High-Throughput Condor; I'll talk about this
in a little bit. Um, and, um, there might be, site might be running some other intra-site protocol. However across sites or
intersite, there is a protocol, uh, typically a standard
protocol like Globus, running, which allows, uh, the
different jobs of an application to be scheduled
at different sites. So essentially, uh,
what happens is that Globus decides which job
gets scheduled at which site and then, uh, the intrasite
protocol at that site decides how to, uh, schedule
the different tasks of that job, uh, at the different machines
in that particular site. So let's look at this
in a little bit more detail. So, uh, the intrasite protocol
that runs inside each, uh, site, uh, is responsible for internal
allocation and scheduling so if it's given, uh,
Job 0 and Job 3 to run, it then decides
which of the tasks of Job 3 run on which machines. Again, same thing
for Job 0 as well. Ah, it's responsible
for monitoring. So if any of these, uh, machines
which are running a task, uh, fail or crash, uh, the, uh,
HT Condor Protocol is then responsible
for, uh, restarting those tasks on another, uh, machine. It's also responsible
for distribution and publishing of files. And so, any of the inputs-
input files that are received from, uh, Globus, um, uh, they need
to be internally stored inside, uh, the Wisconsin cluster, uh, and any of the output files
that are generated by the jobs over here,
run over here, need to then be sent
to Globus as well. That's responsib-
that responsibility lies with the HT Condor Protocol as far as the Wisconsin site
is concerned. So a little bit about
the HT Condor protocol. It's a high-throughput computing
system, uh, developped fro-by the University
of Wisconsin, uh, Madison. It belongs to a cy-class of
Cycle-scavenging systems. Uh, essentially Cycle systems
run on a lot of workstations. These workstations might have
regular users like students, might be using these, uh,
clusters to do their, uh, programming assignments
and homeworks. Uh, however, there are
certain times of day when, uh, work stations
are free. For instance, at night
almost all the workstations might be free. Even during the day time,
there might be some times when certain workstations
are free. So whenever a workstation
is free or idle, the workstation which is running
the-the Condor, uh, daemon, uh, goes and asks the site's central server, the Wisconsin's sites
central server or perhaps Globus,
uh, for, uh, for tasks. Um, and it is given
a task to run. When the task completes, uh,
then it asks for another task, and so on and so forth. However if, uh,
the user comes along and hits a keystroke or
a mouse click on that machine, then the task need to be stopped because essentially the task, uh, is potentially using
a lot of the, uh, CP computing resources
at that particular, uh, machine. So either that task is killed
so that, uh, the central server at that site
can restart it, or, um, uh, the partial results
from that task are sent to the central server so that, uh, the rest
of the work of that task can be completed on some other,
uh, work station. Typically the easiest way is
to just kill the task because, uh, a task
s-can simply be repeated, uh, some other, uh, server. Uh, the HT Condor System
can of course be run on a dedicated set
of machines as well, not just on workstations which have otherwise
regular users. So Condor is an example of an,
uh, intrasite, uh, protocol. Um, the intersite protocol
which is typically Globus, uh, runs, uh, between sites. The internal structure
of the different sites, um, uh, is typically invisible,
uh, to, uh, Globus. So this is known
as transparency, uh, and transparency essentially
means that, uh, the, um, essentially means invisibility, right. So Globus does not necessarily
need to know about what Condor does
inside the Wisconsin site or what MIT's intrasite protocol does inside the MIT site. It has a well-defined API
that it uses to communicate with these intrasite protocols. So Globus protocol
is responsible for external allocation. Um, it's responsible
for the scheduling to the extent that it talks
with the, uh, schedulers, uh, in the, uh,
at the individual sites, but Globus doesn't
necessarily do much of scheduling itself. Uh, so, um, uh,
it is also responsible for staging in and out of files so any of the wide
area files transfers that might be involved,
for instance, when Job 1 is allocated to MIT and Job 3
is allocated to Wisconsin, the output data of Job 1
that needs to go to Job 3, uh, essentially that's data that needs to be transferred
from MIT to Wisconsin, that is transferred
by the Globus protocol. So, uh, Globus's, uh,
there's a Globus alliance which involves universities, several national
US research labs, and, uh, several companies. And they have helped
standardize, uh, several things, especially software tools. Um, there is also
the open grid forum, which is separate
but related to this. The Globus Alliance has
essentially developed the Globus Toolkit,
which is, uh, one of the standard, uh, ways
to run the intersite protocol. The Globus Toolkit
is open source and it consists
of several components. The Grid FTP component of Globus
is responsible for, uh, the wide area transfer
of large amounts of data. For instance, if, uh, a job
sends its output data to another job in the DAG
of the application, then Grid FTP is responsible
for transferring this data across different sites. GRAM, or Grid Resource
Allocation Manager is-is what users use to submit,
locate, cancel and manage jobs. Uh, it's only a job allocator and manager
but it's not a scheduler. Uh, Globus simply communicates
with the intrasite scheduler such as HT Condor, uh,
or the Portable Batch System or other schedulers that, uh,
Globus is compatible with. There's also a replica
location service or RLS which is essentially
a naming service. Uh, so users like us, uh, give
names to files or directories that we deal with or that
jobs need to deal with. These are human readable names, however these files may be stored at one more locations, one or different sites. And the RLS is essentially
a naming service that helps translate
from the user, uh, visible name to the target location itself. Uh, the RLS might also translate
a-a name, uh, s-of a file or directory to another file
or directory name and then you recurse through
the, uh, uh, RLS service itself to eventually find
the target location. Globus also has
several libraries like the-like the XIO library that helps provide
standardized API's for all Grid IO functionalities. And, uh, Globus, uh, spends
a lot of, uh, effort and, uh, uh, infrastructure on,
uh, security, so the Grid Security Infrastructure
or the GSI service of Globus is a very important component
of Globus. Some of the things
that, uh, are related to security appear on the slide. Security is important in grids because grids
are essentially federated. Uh, each of the different, um,
sites in a grid structure such as the Wisconsin site or
the MIT site or the NCSA site is run by
different organizations. There is no central authority that manages
and owns the entire grid. Uh, as a result, uh, uh, things
like security and access control need to be managed
in a way that, uh, may be in security of data but also do not make life,
uh, hard for, uh, the users of the grid. So single sign on are one of
the things that, uh, um, Globus really does care about. Essentially once a user starts,
um, an entire application, uh, they need to sign on only
once in the beginning. They don't need to keep signing
on, uh, at different sites. Um, now the security mechanisms
that are visible to, um, uh, a given user, the policies that
the user wants to implement, uh, might map in different ways
through the mechanisms at different sites. So, for instance,
the Wisconsin site might be, uh, using, uh, a particular
security service like, uh, Kerberos
for authentication. Others might be using simple
UNIX authentication and you need to map, uh,
what the user sees to these different sites in a way that the use does not need to grapple with the different mechanisms at different sites. Delegation is important so, um,
resources that were accessible to, uh, job 0 in an application
should be accessible to, uh, the children of job 0
in that application, instead of cre-basically
graph as well. And of course, a third party
authentication is needed. Uh, this needs to be, uh, done
as, uh, well, uh, and third party authorization of
resources also needs to be done, in a way that is, uh,
transparent, uh, to the user and the user does not need, uh, to grapple with, uh, the different mechanisms
at different sites all at the same time. And all of these , uh, issues, such as single
sign on delegation are all important in clouds but there is less emphasis
in clouds. And the reason for this is
essentially because, uh, most of the times
a cloud-a cloud is run under a single central control. So for instance,
Amazon web services runs a variety of data centers,
uh, but essentially all the data centers are under the control of Amazon. And so, uh, single sign on,
delegation, uh, mapping to local
security mechanisms are relatively easier to solve, eh, in that, uh, single control,
uh, environment than in the federated
environment, uh, of, uh, grids. As a result in clouds the focus
tends to be on failures, scale, and, uh, the on-demand, uh,
access of, uh, resources. That's not to say
that these security issues are not important in, uh,
cloud computing environments such as Amazon web services, they are important, uh, but
because those are not federated, uh, they are, um, uh,
we hear less about them. So in summary, the grid
computing focuses typically on computation
intensive computing. Uh, it offers, uh, a federated
architecture, uh, um, uh, however the architecture
and key concepts have a lot with that of cloud, uh, architectures
and cloud infrastructures. Uh, the typical users
of grid applications today tend to be biologists, uh, physicists, um, and meteorologists, um, who, uh, do weather prediction
and simulation. Now there is an open question
out there, um, uh, which is whether grids and in general high performance
computing are in fact, converging towards
cloud computing and toward data
intensive computing and, uh, this is
an open question. There is a lot of commonalities
among these two different areas but they tend
to be disjoint areas in terms of what the software and the standards
that they develop as well as, uh, the conferences where research gets published. So one of the things
that I would encourage you to do is to compare the architecture of Globus with
the architecture of OpenStack. OpenStack is one of these cloud
computing, uh, open source, um, uh, platforms that has emerged, uh, so that you can draw
your own virtualized, um, cloud computing platform. There is a lot of commonality in the goals
of OpenStack and Globus. The architectures are different, uh, but, um, I encourage you
to look at them and see what
commonalities are there and what differences are there in between these two systems.