Hi there. So, uh, in, um, uh,
the next couple of lectures we'll be seeing how to implement the flavors
of multicast ordering which we saw
in, uh, the previous lecture. Uh, these flavors were FIFO,
causal and total ordering. In this lecture, uh, today we'll
see, uh, how to implement FIFO as well as, um, uh,
total ordering, and in the next lecture
we'll see, uh, causal ordering. So here's how
to implement FIFO ordering. Each receiver in the group maintains a per-sender
sequence number. These sequence numbers
are integers, uh, starting from zero. Uh, suppose we have N processes
in the group, P1 through PN. Uh, essentially, Pi,
which is the ith process, would maintain a vector of sequence numbers, uh, Pi[1...N]. Initially, all these,
um, elements in the vector are, uh, zeros. Uh, Pi[j], which is
the jth element in Pi's vector, is the latest sequence number
that Pi has received from the process Pj. If j=i, remember
that Pi will have, uh, its, uh, an, uh,
a sequence number for itself. This would be
the latest sequence number that Pi has sent out to the, uh, other processes
in the group. So, uh, what do you do? How do you update these vectors? So, um, uh, when you want
to, uh, uh, send a, uh, multicast message, uh, from a process Pj, uh, the first thing you do,
uh, at process Pj is that you set the jth element
of Pj's vector, uh, to be one more than itself, so you increment
the j's element, j-j's element-jth element
of P's vector. Uh, then you include, uh, this,
uh, jth element, the new Pj[j], in a multicast message
as the sequence number of that multicast message. You also say that of course Pj
is the center of this multicast. Now what does
the process, uh, Pi do when it receives
this multicast message from Pj? Uh, it looks at, uh, the sender,
which is Pj, it looks at the sequence number in the message, which, say, is S, uh,
it checks whether or not, uh, S is, uh, equal
to the jth, uh, element of Pi's, uh, sequence number
vector, plus 1, okay? Essentially it checks whether or
not, uh, the sequence number S being received from Pj
is the next sequence number that Pi expects
to receive from Pj. If so, then it can deliver, uh,
the, uh, multicast message to the application, and the m-and the application
can do whatever it wants with this particular
multicast message, and then it can-it can set,
uh, the jth element of its own, uh, vector, uh,
to be, uh, 1 plus its old value. However, if this condition
is not true, uh, if this is not, uh, the next, uh, element
in the vector, uh, then it buffers
this multicast, uh, message. Now it buffers it,
essentially we are assuming here that, uh, the sequence number is going to be
later on, um, in the series. So for instance,
if the next sequence number that Pi is expecting
from Pj is 5, and it receives, uh,
the sequence number um-uh-uh, 7 then it needs to wait until, uh, 5 has been received and delivered, and then 6 has been received
and delivered, and only then can it deliver 7. However, if duplication
is possible in the network, for instance, if the next,
um-uh, message that Pi is waiting from, uh, Pj should have a sequence number 5, but you receive, uh, um, uh,
a multicast from Pj with the sequence number 3, then you can drop
that multicast message, uh, and, uh, safely,
because you already know that you have delivered
that to the application. Okay, uh, let's look
at an example of, uh, how the
FIFO ordering algorithm works. So here are four processes
P1 through P4. Time moves from left to right
for each of the processes. Each process maintains a vector. The number of elements
in the vector is 4 because there are four processes in the system. Remember that the jth element
at, say, process P1 corresponds to how many
multicasts P1 has received so far from, uh, Pj. So here are all the multicasts
that are sent out in the group. P1 sends two multicasts, uh,
one followed by another, and then P3 later on
sends another multicast. So let's see what happens with
the first multicast from P1. P1's sequence number, uh,
for this first multicast is 1 because it's sent
no multicasts so far. P1's first element
of its vector is 0. That's incremented to 1, and that, uh, new value
is assigned as a sequence number to the multicast message. When P2 receives
this multicast message, it checks its first element
of the vector, which is zero, and so in fact
the sequence number is the next sequence
number it's expecting, and the multicast is delivered, and the vector-
the vector is updated to be 1 followed by three 0. The same is true at, uh, P4, which also delivers
a multicast message and updates its vector to be one
followed by three zeros. Uh, however, when P1's multicast
is, uh, received at P3, P1's second multicast
has already been received, and if P3 delivered
these multicasts in this order
shown in the slide, then you would violate
FIFO ordering, because, uh, P1's two multicasts are delivered
in the wrong order at P3. So let's see what happens with
the second multicast from P1. When it's sent out it has
a sequence number of 2, because P1's first element
is already one. That's incremented to be two, and that is included
as sequence number. When this multicast is received
at, uh, P3 early, uh, it sees-P3 sees
that P1-its element for P1 is in fact 0, and the next
sequence number it is expecting is, uh, 1, and so
the sequence number 2 message that has just been received
needs to be buffered. However, later on at some point
of time soon after, uh, P3 receives
a first multicast from P1. This is in fact the next
sequence number it is expecting. It then delivers this second
multicast message immediately, and then after this, the sequence number that it's
expecting from P1 is now 2, because P3
has updated its vector to be one followed
by three zeros. And at this point immediately
the sequence number 2 message from P1 can be delivered
right away. After P1's sequence
number 1 message, the vector can be updated to be 2 followed by three 0, and we have satisfied
FIFO ordering. When, uh, P2 receives P1's
multicast, second multicast, delivers it because that's the next sequence
number 2 is expecting, then, uh, P3 sends out
its multicast message. This is a sequence number of 1 because P3 has not sent
any multicasts yet. P3's third element,
uh, is in fact 0. That's incremented to 1,
and that is included as a sequence number
in the multicast message. P1 and P2, when they receive
this multicast message from P3, they check that their third
elements of the vector are 0, and so the sequence number 1
is in fact what they're expecting from P3, and they deliver
the multicast message and update
their vectors accordingly. However, P4, when it receives
this, what does it do? Well, when P4 receives
the multicast message from P3, first it can deliver it, because it's the next sequence
number it's expecting from P3, and that's fine, and then later on it, uh, receives the sequence num- the sequence number 2 message
from P1, and it can deliver it right away and update its vector
to be 2,0,1,0. This is fine;
this satisfies FIFO ordering, even though the P3 sequence number 1 message was delivered first at P4 before P1's sequence
number 2 message, while this ordering of
deliveries was reversed in P3. But this is fine, because FIFO
doesn't necessarily look at the order-ordering
of messages sent by different
sending processes. So that was, uh, FIFO. Next, uh, we'll look
at total ordering and how to implement it. Once again, just to remind you,
total ordering ensures that, uh, uh, the, um, ordering
of deliveries of messages at all the processes
are the same, uh, somewhat independent
of what order they were sent in. So a-a popular approach
to implement total ordering is to use sequencer- uh,
is to use a sequencer. Uh, a special process is elected
as a leader or a sequencer. Uh, you will, uh, have seen
leader election elsewhere in this course, um, and essentially in order
to send a multicast message, there's what
the process Pi does. It simply sends a multicast
message M to the group, along, uh, with sending it
to the sequencer as well. The sequencer in turn maintains
a global sequence number S, which initially
has a value of 0. When the sequencer receives
the multicast message M from any process, it increments S and
then it multicasts M along with the
sequence number S. Okay, and this is multicast
to the entire group again. What does the process Pi do when
it receives a multicast message? Well Pi maintains a local received global
sequence number, Si, okay? This is only one integer, not
a vector, just a single integer. This, um-uh, represents
the next, uh, globally ordered or totally ordered multicast
that Pi is expecting to receive. If Pi receives a multicast M,
uh, message M from Pj, it buffers that
multicast message M until it receives
the sequence number message for that same message M
from the sequencer, so until it receives, um, a message
from the sequencer that says "Hey, for the multicast
message M, the sequencer i -the sequence number is S(M)," and, um, but
receiving this mult-this, uh, sequencer message
doesn't necessarily entail that the multicast
can be delivered right away. The sequence numbers
have to match up. In other words, it has to wait
until the S(M) value in, uh, the message from the sequencer
is one more than, uh, the global sequence number Si that Pi is waiting for, okay? So this ensures that in fact,
uh, the multicast message, uh, that Pi delivers next
is in fact the next one that Pi is waiting for. Once it, uh, once this is true,
it can then deliver the message, this multicast,
to the application, and then it can increment Si,
and then at this point of time, if any buffered messages,
uh, satisfy, uh, these two conditions here, then in fact they
can be delivered as well, and Si can be incremented. So next, uh, lecture we'll see
how to implement, uh, causal ordering for multicasts.