So I've been at Yahoo
for about three years. Um, I am currently a senior
director of product management for the cloud and
bigger platforms. Uh, it's a pleasure
speaking with you here. When you think about cloud at
Yahoo, uh, or perhaps any other consumer internet company that operates at web-scale
or the scale we operate at, obviously one
of the first things you would think about is scale. Um, and some the other things
that come to mind are, eh, i-if you ask us or the people across
Yahoo it would be service, would be an attribute
that would come to people, service level agreement, SLA, or latency is another thing
that would come to mind, um, a-and then performance. So these are the types
of attributes that people would associate
to cloud computing right? Ease of use of consuming
technology, um, y-y'know, um, expectations around services, those are the types of things that would come to people, um, peoples' mind, uh,
or our developers' mind because it's a private cloud. Our services are
for internal consumption to Yahoos and Yahoo developers so the products and
applications that we host, uh, or the-the platform services
that we provide to our developers
are for our developers, y'know, and our applications. So Yahoo Mail, uh, some
of our mobile applications, search and all kinds
of other things we do or-or the businesses
we operate in, is what our cloud is supposed
to serve or expected to serve. Uh, we don't offer retail
services to, let's say, y'know, consumers outside of Yahoo or
our publishers or anybody else. So that's what I mean
by a private cloud it's really in my mind, it-it-th-the stacks and
the technologies that we put together are more or less the same,
as let's say, a leading public cloud, but the
primary difference here is, um, what we focus on versus
what they focus on. Uh, and the second is that, uh,
it's not a retail service in any sense,
the IP space is private. Not just Hadoop but if you think
about the big data space we have all kinds of other
services now, um, that either run on the same Hadoop infrastructure like Storm or Spark, um, we have introduced those
years ago, um, at a least
a couple of years ago, uh, when it came to Storm uh, and now have some
of the largest clusters, um, for streaming technologies and other things. So it not
just Hadoop anymore, uh, and that's why I like
to call it now, Hadoop and band big data
platforms a-as our group, uh, and then when you come to more
traditional cloud services, which are beyond big data, uh, particularly
on the serving side, um, a lo-a-lot of it is,
y'know, infrastructure services so we work a straight
back through open stack. Uh, we are a gold
foundation member of the open stack,
uh, consortium. Um, I talked
about storage services, about structured and unstructured services, we also talk about hosted search
service, dynamic serving something, um, that-that we're pretty proud of uh, or is really essential
to a consumer web company is th-the serving stack,
um, so we have o-orchestrated the full serving stack
through our cloud services. Uh, we have a set of shared
services like, y'know, messaging across applications, across data centers, hosted messaging services, um, monitoring services, so a-a lot and-and complete ed services
like suite of, y'know, video hosting service, um, dynamic streaming, we have our own CDM, we have our own prox-cloud
proxy infrastructure so it's a full suite
of service, um, just as you may look at,
let's say, something else which is more
trust-bearing to people outside like Amazon web services and if you look
at their suite of services, our suite of services
look exactly the same. So we live and die
distribute computing, um, and we're the ones
who are building, let's say, the Hadoops,
the Hive, and th-the Hbase and things like those
for our company, alright, as well as contributing to the
open source community, uh, across all of these technologies so for us
it's extremely important, but for a user of Hbase, uh,
for a user of Hadoop it may or may not
be equally important. For them, I guess, what's
more important to know is the capabilities
of these platforms, rather than, um, y'know,
what underlying algorithm does the, uh, does the storage
technologies based off of. So I'll give you a good example we had, eh, we have a storage system called Sherpa. Now Sherpa is based
off of a work that was done out of Yahoo labs a long time ago, um, and it was one of the largest
no-SQL installs anywhere in the world
at that time, it's called Peanuts. Um, and, um, now Sherpa
also uses some of the LSM technologies
and LSM's common across, let's say, Sherpa and-and Hbase. Um, now does a person outside
of our platforms organization need to know about these
things, I'm not quite sure? What they ought
to be worried about is like what's my read latency, what's my write latency, what's my read throughput, what's my write throughput if I'm using this storage system
versus that storage system, is this optimal for my use case, is that for optimal
for my use case. And I think
we help our customers a lot in making those decisions, but at the same time I think customers ought
to be smart enough to disseminate the
nuances between, y'know, a million different DB's and-and
no-SQL stacks up there. Yeah I think-I think we have
a philosophy, I mean we both
contribute heavily to the open source technologies, we have open sourced a lot
of our own technologies, uh, for the benefit
of the community. Hadoop being one that we open
sourced in 2009, which is probably one of
the most successful, um, I would say stories, um, that Yahoo has as far
as open source is concerned. ATS is another one,
Apache Traffic Server, which was earlier Incoming Traffic Server, later became and that's widely used across
companies that operate in the cloud computing space. Um, we're doing a lot of work,
um, in open source as well, um, on technologies that were
not developed at Yahoo. So, I'll give you an example
like Storm, like Spark, like Hbase, like Hive a lot of these were not invented
at Yahoo, right? So we brought them from outside
and we contribute, um, um, a lot to those as well, um, we have done, um, pretty, um, I
would say important work when it comes to Hbase in terms
of developing multi-tenants in security in, y'know types
of things that Yahoo needs, types of things
that our customers need from the platform, we've gone ahead
and built those and these open
source technologies to have brought from outside and in the process of,
or have already contributed a lot of that back
to the community. So, I think the philosophy really is about what's useful for Yahoo, uh, be it, eh, the decision of open sourcing something
that we have developed or bringing something from
outside and contributing to it, uh, and it works both ways. Uh, but really the-the essential
idea behind making that decision is to how it's going
to benefit Yahoo, um, and then how it's going
to benefit the community and what would be
the impact to Yahoo as well as the technology
landscape in the longer term. Y'know the question
can be answered, again as I said earlier to you, uh, in-in, two
different, uh, sort of realms. Um, the enterprises think about
cloud in somewhat different way, uh, particularly
in the industry, um, as we the web-scale cloud
consumer internet companies think about cloud, um, an-and I think if you ask
those people, like the enterprise-centric
people about cloud they would talk about, um, y'know, the debate between
public and private cloud and how everything is evolving
as a hybrid model, uh, where workloads can seamlessly transfer
on-and-off premise. Um, they would talk about things
like, y'know, multi-cloud, and private
an-and, members cloud, and, uh, uh, all kinds
of other notions around, um, how these clouds services,
the public cloud services, will be consumed
by the enterprises, the security models
and things like that a-and I think
the general consensus is this hybrid model, uh, is
how it's going to evolve into. But again, with a
services-centric view, not a technology-centric
view, um, as far as technology
itself is concerned, um, obviously a-a company
that operates on that space will promote its own
technology and agenda, a long-term view of how
things are going to evolve. Some would say it's all gonna
be open or based on open stack or based on something else. Um, somebody will have some
other notion, um, if, but, y'know, as far as
Yahoo is concerned and where things are headed I think, um, we're, um, g-we
will to continue to focus on things
that we're focused on today i-in my opinion that battle
will never cease. A-and I think one
of the primary battles we have in this space
is around latency. Everything we do,
within the data center all the way to the end customer, really reducing
that serving time, from when the request was made, to when the response was served, uh, is something we're going to
continue to focus on, a-across our stack,
across our services. Um, I don't think that will ever
go away, uh, tha-or that focus will ever go away. Ah, this-this notion
of instantaneous response, you click something
and you have the answer, that will never go away. Um, so our technologies, uh,
our services will continue to focus on that. We will continue
to refine our SLAs that we make with our customers, around throughput,
around latencies, um, and they are going to stay
as our focus. Um, I think, I also think that
from a technology standpoint, um, there is a-a blurring
of boundaries between the backstage, um,
infrastructure or platform, as well as the serving
in-infrastructure or platform an-and there now sort
of, eh, eh, converging, right? So Hadoop was sort of our, y'know, asynchronous
processing platform, we had a bunch
of proprietary technologies in this serving stack,
and as you can see a lot of these
are now merging, right? People are demanding
real-time responses from Hadoop type infrastructure as well as people are expecting
more and more, um, y'know, deep edge capabilities, um, deep
analytics capabilities, right? And the edge would be
an event of Internet of things a-a-a-and, um, eh,
and that's not quite possible, um, um, given the,
given the, um, size and the processing powers
of these edge devices. So, eh, I-I think there is a
lot of blurring of this boundary between asynchronous processing
and serving infrastructure and I think technologies will
evolve in both of these spaces, um, that would try to do
more, uh, uh of both. Um, so integrating analytics
on the edge, uh, we can't send everything
back to the data center and expect real time response back to the edge, um, those types of things
will not happen so you will develop
new types of capabilities. As I said our cloud covers
everything from the edge, back to the data center, so there will be
a lot of invention, a lot of, I would say, e-evolution of technologies that we use today, uh, both in our
video infrastructure and CDN in objects. CDN infrastructure
will evolve a-a lot to take care of things like
the-the, um, the evolution of, eh, y'know, internet
of things and other things and as we as consumer
internet company latches on to some of those. Um, so, eh-eh it's-it's, five to ten years is definitely
going to be extremely exciting. That is all I can say. Um, this-this space has, y'know,
millions of possibilities where things will head, uh, but one thing I can say for
confiden-with confidence is that, um, it will-it will
extremely interesting. Absolutely, um,
a-and not just again Yahoo, I would say it's the foun-the
platforms, the cloud platforms, the foundation
of any consumer web company, I mean, not just for Yahoo. Um, in many a cases platforms
and technologies become competitive vantage, um, and so the-the-the usage of
cloud, the importance of cloud, the importance of platforms
have not gone down, it's only becoming
more and more important as we try to bring more, um,
I would say, innovative user experiences, mobile experiences out in the
market at a quicker pace. The role of platform only
impro-, um, I would say increases, um, so i-it actually helps us get
things out on the market faster. Um, a-and that's exactly where
we're focused on right now in terms of delivering new and
interesting user experiences. Um, that, um, eh, as we call as will become
the daily habits of people. Um, and the importance of cloud,
the importance of platform, eh, has really, really increased,
uh, it has not gone down. Wh-so, eh, for me the whole
platform space, the cloud, um, th-the big data space
was very interesting. So when I was making
the transition into Yahoo, um, that was the space
I wanted to get into, so I was somewhat
domain-centric, less company focused. Um, and, um I got all of that,
I got to do all of that and I got to work in cloud, I got to work at scale
that is unbelievable. We have, y'know, give or take
how you-how you define the users 800 to a billion unique users, a-and that drives a lot of interesting scale challenges on the technology side,
on the platform side. You get to see all of that. Um, the other interesting thing
I find, uh, which keeps me extremely happy here is this idea of, so when it comes to big data
or Hadoop, remember, this was the birthplace of Hadoop right? So you have a very strong
development team that has, let's say, more than 50% of it's, um, eh, eh, members as committers or PMC's
in leadership roles in the open source community. Um, so they control a lot of,
um, y'know, what happens, uh, in the, uh,
open source community, um, so-so it's always interesting
to work with them, uh, on the development side and then al-we also have one of
the world's largest footprints in the world when it comes to
the infrastructure itself, uh, and the services we offer
to rest of Yahoo. Uh, pretty much the entire
business runs on the platform, so, y-you to get see both these
sides, uh, at the same place, in the same job, uh,
which is pretty exciting. So, tha-that to me
has been invaluable. I don't think
I-I'm going to get that in a pure software
distribution house, uh, or in a pure
public cloud company. Um, over here I think
I get to see both, th-the all the engineering
and development aspects of the technology, as well the services aspect. When you deploy
a lot of what we develop on one of the world's largest private cloud infrastructures. So, um, no issues,
no complaints. [laughs]