[MUSIC] In this lecture we're going to try to
define the term distributed system. It won't be a perfect definition, but
it will be a definition that will work for us in this course. Before we do that, let's take a step
back and define a different but related term that is the operating system. What is operating system? Well if you have used a machine, if you've
used a device, whether it's a tablet or a smart phone or whether it's a laptop or
a computer or a server, all these devices, each of these devices runs an operating
system also known as an OS. So if you've used a computer,
you have used an operating system. The operating system
runs on the device and it manages the different
components of the device. So let's, before we define
the term operating systems, let's name some examples
of operating systems. Here are some names, some OS's for
big devices included Linux, Mac OS X. Of course there are many
different versions of it. Windows, of course again there
are many different versions. And Unix and FreeBSD. And there are many, many examples of OS's for
large devices which I'm not listing here. For small devices like the handhelds and
the tablets, you have operating systems like Android from Google,
iOS from Apple, TinyOS, which runs on small sensor nodes which
you'll see later on in this course and, of course, many other small operating
systems that I'm not naming here. Now let's try to define
the term operating system. Before we jump to some
well-known definitions, let's try to summarize what we
know about operating systems. The operating system, essentially,
it provides a user interface to hardware. Your computer, any device, any computer,
consists of multiple devices. For instance, your computer
consists of a keyboard, a mouse, a monitor, a hard drive,
maybe multiple hard drives. And of course, the CPU,
and the memory, and many other peripherals
attached to the mother board. All of these hardware
pieces need to be managed. And these are managed by the software
known as the operating system. The operating system runs
a special piece of code for each of the devices
that is attached to it. This piece of code is
called a device driver. So essentially, as a user you do not need
to interact directly with these devices. It's very rare that as a user, we think
you know, I'm clicking the mouse, and now I need to worry about The message
being sent from the mouse to the CPU, all of that is taken care of by the OS. The OS also provides abstractions, for instance if you store your piece of code,
you're rarely thinking of hey how does this code get
stored as blocks on the disk. You're thinking of files,
you're thinking of directories or folders. When you run your code, you're thinking
of programs being initiated as processes. You're not thinking of where
does this run on the CPU? Where does this store memory? And so on and so forth. Those abstractions
are provided to you by the OS. So essentially the OS abstracts away
the hardware specific features and provides to users features that are
understandable and usable by the users. The operating system of course has to
manage these different resources that it is responsible for. Which processes run when on the CPU, which files get accessed when on
the hard drive and so on and so forth. And of course OS is also a means of
communication, whether it's sending and receiving email or
whether it's accessing the web. Or just communicating in
a distributed system. Here is the definition of OS from
the Free Online Dictionary of Computing, also known as FOLDOC. FOLDOC defines an OS as
the low-level software which handles the interface to peripheral hardware,
schedules tasks, allocates storage, and presents a default interface to the user
when no application program is running. And so for instance when you start up your
machine and there's nothing running on it, the OS is running on it, so
it's going to occupy the CPU. I won't go through the rest
of this definition. You can read it by either
pausing the video here, or going to the FOLDOC page online. But essentially this definition seems to
capture the characteristics that we said were true of operating systems
in the previous slide. Let's try to repeat the same exercise,
but for the term Distributed System. Let's name some examples
of distributed systems. Here are some examples, a single client
machine communicating with a server, for instance if you know NFS, if you have
used NFS, Networked File System. Single client may communicate
with a single server, that's a distributed system. A BitTorrent, which BitTorrent is a peer
to peer overlay which consists of many millions of clients
communicating with each other is again another example
of a distributed system. The Internet where you have many
servers and clients and routers and switches communicating with each other is
another example of a distributed system and the web where you have servers and
clients communicating amongst and with each other is an example
of a distributed system. Hadoop which we'll study
later in the course and data centers are all examples
of distributed systems. What are not examples
of distributed systems? Well, if you have a collection of humans,
say in a party, interacting with each other,
that's not a distributed system. At least, that's not the kind of
distributed system that we want to study in this course. I mean they might be interesting,
of course, in other courses but not in this course. A standalone machine not connected to the
network and with only one process running on it is, again, an example of something
that is not a distributed system. Birds out there interacting
with each other, that's again an example of something
that is not a distributed system. It's an interesting, I guess,
social phenomenon which biologists study. But not in a computer science course. So is there a good definition out there? Well FOLDOC, the Free Online Dictionary
of Computing was helpful to us for the OS definition, so let's go back to FOLDOC for
its definition of a distributed system. FOLDOC says that a distributed
system is a collection of automator, when it says automator it essentially it
means programs, whose distribution is transparent to the user so that
the system appears as one local machine. It's saying that essentially the collection of machines appears as one
machine rather than as multiple machines to the user who is using
the distributed system. This is in contrast to a network, where the user is aware that there
are several machines and their location, storage replication, load balancing and
functionality is not transparent. Distributed systems usually use some
kind of client-server organization. So this is the follow up definition for
distributed systems. I claim that this definition is wrong. It's just wrong. And in fact,
there are two mistakes in this definition. The first mistake is that the definition
says that in a distributed system, a collection of machines
appears as one local machine. But if this is true,
then the web is not a distributed system. For instance, on the web, it's often the case that a website A may
be up while a different website B is down. And at a different point of time website
B is up while website A is down. It's never the case that both A and
B are up and both A and B are down. So essentially these two web servers
do not appear as one local machine, yet the web is a distributed system. The second mistake in this definition
is the last sentence which says that distributed systems usually use some
kind of client-server organization. This is not always true. Peer to peer systems like BitTorrent, and
many other peer to peer systems before it, rely largely on the clients
communicating with each other. That's why they are called
peer to peer systems. They do not rely, on a server, except for
some very minor, functionalities. Essentially without the server, these systems would continue
functioning just as normally. So unfortunately the formula
definition doesn't work for us. Well, let's look at a couple
of definitions textbooks. Andrew Tanenbaum in his
textbook on distributed systems defines it as a collection
of independent computers that appear to the users of
the system as a single computer. Again, the same issue, the same error that
we saw in the previous slide as appears in this definition as well,
so it doesn't work for us. Michael Schroeder, another famous
distributed systems researcher defines a distributed system as several
computers doing something together. Thus, a distributed system has
three primary characteristics: multiple computers,
interconnections, and shared state. This definition is closer to what we want,
but it's missing some components. For instance, it doesn't talk about
servers or clients failing, and so that's a little bit worrisome here. So this definition doesn't work for
us either. So all these definitions are short and
looking inadequate to us mostly because we are interested in
the insides of a distributed system. We don't want to behave like
users of a distributed system, we want to go under the hood. We want to go Inside a distributed system,
and study what algorithms run there. How do you design a distributed system, how do you implement a distributed system,
how do you maintain, and of course what are the real
characteristics of distributed systems? As you have seen,
as I've mentioned before, there are some examples that when you see it you
know that it's not a distributed system. Humans or birds interacting with each other, a stand
alone machine not connected to a network. So we know it when we see it, and
this is captured very nicely in a quote by Justice Potter Stewart in a case in
1964 where he said that essentially, I know it when I see it, but
it may be hard to define it. So we're going to venture
forth the definition, and this is my working definition. This will work for
this version of the course. So a distributed system,
this definition says, is a distributed system is a collection
of entities, each of these entities being autonomous, programmable,
asynchronous and failure-prone, and these entities communicate through
an unreliable communication medium. So let me through this definition and
explain each of these objectives here. The entities are essentially processes. So each entity is a process
that is running on some device. Each entity is autonomous,
meaning it's standalone. If left to its own devices, pun intended,
if left to its own, it will run just fine. The entities are programmable. Of course, you have written code
that is running underneath and inside these processes,
so they are programmable. Notice that this is the term
that eliminates humans or birds interacting with each other
as being distributed systems. You can't really program human beings or
birds interacting with each other so that's why those are not
distributed systems. Asynchronous is very important, this
essentially means that each process or each entity runs according to its own
clock and these clocks are different entities are processes,
are not synchronized with each other. They are not always showing
the same time as each other and you will see a lot more and
more of this later on in the course. And finally is these
entities is failure prone, each entity may crash arbitrarily
at any point in time. At any color for instance,
at some point of time. And these entities are communicating
through an unreliable communication medium whereby they send and
receive messages through each other. However, these messages that are being
sent may be dropped completely, or they may be delayed for
inordinately long periods of time. Okay, so that's the definition that
I have for a distributed system. So, entity, when I say an entity, again,
I mean a process on a device, would be it a small pc or be it a pc or a laptop,
be it a tablet or a small sensor mode. And a communication medium may be
a wired network or a wireless network or some combination thereof. So, once again, the programmable objective eliminates
humans interacting with each other. The asynchronous objective distinguishes
distributed systems from parallel systems. Parallel systems include multiprocessor
systems and super computers. But essentially, very large numbers of
processors share the same motherboard. They communicate with each other
over a tightly coupled network, and they all have a synchronized clock. So all the processors are showing
the same clock at all points of time. A distributed system is
very different from that, a distributed system has asynchrony, which
means that clocks are unsynchronized. And that's why distributed systems
are harder to design algorithms for, and implement for. You might remember a process, which
you've seen in the orientation lecture. A process in all its gory detail,
with its code, its stack, its program counter, pointing to where
the code is currently executing, heap and registers and
a whole bunch of other things. Now process is an important
entity in a distributed system. In fact, a distributed system,
as we said, consists of many processes. In this example,
I have a three process P1, P2, P3 but there might be thousands of processes
involved in a distributed system. You have an unreliable communication
network involved underneath. In this course, we are not interested
in the insides of the network, just the fact that we are able to send and
receive messages via this network. So P1 might be able to send a message
m to P3, which then gets delivered at some point of time to P3,
and that receives the message. Okay, so this is essentially what we
see as a distributed system, multiple processes communicating by sending and
receiving messages from each other. When you think of distributed system for
working purposes for this course,
that's really all you need to think about, processes, sending and
receiving messages amongst one another. A caveat here, that's only a working
definition good for this course. You should feel free to come up with your
own definition for distributed systems. I would especially encourage you to try
this exercise after you have seen the many many examples of distributed systems
as you see them in this course. So try it at the end of this course. So, given this definition,
there are many interesting problems for distributed systems people like us,
you and me. Peer to peer systems, which we will
study many of, Cloud Infrastructures, which we'll see some of,
Cloud Storage systems, software systems, Key-value stores and NoSQL, we'll see some
of those, Cassandra and HBase as well. Cloud programming including MapReduce,
Storm and Pregel. Some of this you'll see soon. Coordination including consensus. Protocols like Paxos, leader elections,
snapshots and many others. And of course, managing these many clients
and servers that are interacting with each other via concurrency control techniques
and application control techniques. All these topics that I've listed on this
slide are relevant to this course and you will see them as we move along
in this course in both part one and part two of Cloud Computing Concepts. When we solve these problems, we need to
be aware of several features that are true in the distributed systems underneath and
we need to design for these features. Failures are no longer the exception but
rather a norm. As we've discussed before,
when the scale of your system grows, failures become very, very common. When you have thousands of machines and
terabytes of data, we need to be able to scale any algorithm
you design for a distributed system, this needs to be able to
scale very well to many, many machines at really
large amounts of data. Asynchrony again is a very important
challenge that you have to deal with when designing distributed algorithms. The fact that different processes
have unsynchronized clocks means that you will have a difference
between clocks, clock skew. You'll also have clocks moving apart from
each other that's known as clock drift. Again you'll see these
later on in the course. Of course concurrency is
something we have to deal with. Thousands of machines
accessing the same data, interacting with each other,
are bound to create to risk conditions and are bound to create conditions
where data might be inconsistent. And so we have to be careful to make sure
the data stays consistent even while machines are interacting with each
other and are accessing the same data. So over the next few weeks we will see
several core concepts of distributed systems. Next week you will see gossip and
membership. And then we'll see distributed
hash tables as well, which are an important building block for
peer to peer systems. And we'll alternate the core concepts with
the use of these core concepts in real systems, So when we see distributed hash tables we'll
also see they're in peer-to-peer systems. We also see how some of these building
blocks are used in key-value stores and NoSQL storage systems. For instance these NoSQL storage
systems use distributed hash tables, they use, gossip, they use membership. That's why you study concepts first and then we see how they're
used In real systems. [MUSIC]