So today we'll, uh, look
at the internal details of, uh, uh, of Napster. So Napster, essentially, has, uh, all, each of the users
run a Napster client, and so these clients
are called peers. We just call them as peers
because, essentially, uh, they are treated equally as far as the system is concerned. So these are denoted as the
green circles on this figure, with a "P" in them. Uh, now, when you upload a file, so you may upload a file
that is the song "Penny Lane" by Beatles, you upload it
to your Napster client. It doesn't go anywhere;
it stays on the machine, on the workstation or laptop, where your Napster client
is running. The files are stored
by the peers. Uh, they are not transferred
by default. There are also
a bunch of servers, in this case denoted
as red circles with "S", which are run by Napster.com, and these servers store directory information with file pointers
and peer pointers. Uh, essentially, uh, here, uh, in this figure, uh, we are showing, uh, the, uh, file, uh, PennyLane.mp3 as being stored at a particular IP address and a port number, and there's some more key f-key word information about that file such as the artist's name. This is the information
that is stored at, uh, the Napster.com servers. The Napster.com servers do not
store the files themselves; they only store
directory information. So when a client starts up, it first connects
to a Napster server. This was shown on the previous slide as the lines in between, let's go back
to the previous slide, uh, the line going in between
a peer and its server, essentially, is the connection between, uh, those two. Notice that the servers
also talk with each other; we'll come to that in a moment. Uh, when, uh, the client
connects to the Napster server it uploads a list
of music files that, um, that client wants to share, and the server maintains,
uh, tuples, which are <filename, ip_address, portnum> tuples. There might also be
other information, such as, key word
associated with it, and the server
does not store any files. So when a client
wants to search, suppose you want to search
for a particular song, essentially, you
would type in your, uh, key words
and you hit "Find It." When you hit "Find It," a message goes out to the server that your client is talking to, uh, with these key words
in them. The server, or the group
of servers rather, talk with each other and search their
directory information lists with these key words. They find all the matching <ip_address, portnum> pairs that have information
about this keyword and return it
to the querying client. The client when it receives this directly pings each
of the hosts in this list, to find the bandwidth or the transfer rates
from these hosts. Then, uh, the results
are visible to you, then when you double-click
on one of the results, the client starts
fetching the file directly from the peer
or from the host. In none of this communication is
the server actually involved in transferring the file. It is used in searching
where the file might be, but it is not used
in transferring the file. Now all along,
whenever I have said "messages," uh, I meant messages sent
using TCP sockets or transmission
control protocol, which is a reliable, uh, transport level,
uh, protocol. So here's a pictorial
depiction of, uh, how the query processing works. When you type in your keywords, a query message
goes out from your peer to the server it's talking to, containing those key words. The servers maintain
the direct information using a ternary tree. Essentially, a ternary tree is a sorted dictionary
data structure, uh, where, um, every internal node in the tree has three children. A binary tree has every node
with two children; ternary tree has every node
with three children. And so this is useful for
searching for, uh, information, uh, using, uh, the, uh, key of, uh, the objects being searched. Then when the objects
are, uh, ready, a response is returned
with all the, uh, <ip_address, portnum> pairs
to the, uh, querying peer, and then the querying peer pings the individual
candidates directly, finds out
the effective bandwidths, and then when you select
the best host, the download starts directly from the best host. Now, one question
that arises oftentimes is how do peers join
a peer-to-peer system? How do they know
which server to contact? Servers, after all,
have IP addresses. Essentially, uh,
the set of servers might be changing all the time, uh, and so, uh,
what you want to do is you want to have a well-known, um, uh, URL, uh, such
as my myp2pservice.com. This might be Napster.com
for Napster, for instance. And so when a client starts up,
it sends a message, uh, or rather it sends
a DNS, uh, query, or a domain name system query, to this URL,
which returns an IP address, in this case
of a Napster server, and then the peer starts talking to that particular
Napster server. Uh, in other
peer-to-peer systems, the domain name system
might return, um, uh, say a well-known server maintaining some recent, um, IP addresses
of recently joined peers, or it may return the IP address of one of the peers that is already in the system. In any case,
the DNS is a great way, uh, to, uh, get introduced
into the system, um, or communicate
with an introducer node or introducer peer,
that will, uh, then, um, uh, uh, tell you some
of the recently joined peers or some of the existing peers
in the system, and so you can
bootstrap your own, uh, uh, neighbor list
using that. And again, this technique
is useful not just for Napster for a newly joining peer
to know about, uh, one or more of the servers, but is also used later on
by our Gnutella system for a newly joining peer to know about some of the existing peers in the system. Now, some of the problems with
Napster included the fact that, uh, the servers are a
centralized point of congestion. If the servers are
overloaded with queries, uh, even though they
did not transfer files, the queries might
overwhelm them. Uh, then the entire system
might become slow because, essentially,
search has become slow. The server is also
a centralized point of failure. If someone took out one
or more of the servers, uh, then the system
would be compromised. Also, the original
versions of Napster did not have any security, messages and passwords
were all plaintext. However, none of these
was a reason that Napster actually was brought down. Uh, the main reason
it was brought down was the fact that the court declared that Napster, even though it was not directly infringing copyrights because it was not
transferring any files, it was instead helping users, uh, "indirectly
infringe" copyright. So "indirect infringement" is
a legal term, and Napster was, um, uh, found
to be guilty, of that. So, some of this, uh,
gave rise to a new system, Gnutella, which overlapped with Napster, in terms of timeline, um, uh, and, which
we'll study next, which addressed some
of these issues with Napster.