[MUSIC] Hi, there.
So in this lecture we'll start looking at the solutions to the mutual exclusion
problem in the distributed setting. So once again, before solving any problem,
you need to make sure that you know what the system model is,
under which you're solving the problem. So here are the assumptions
in our system model here, each pair of processes that is connected,
is connected by reliable channels, which means that when you send messages on these
channels they are delivered eventually. We can use TCP for these channels. The channels that
are point-to-point channels, which means that they have one sender and
one receiver. Messages along the channel are delivered
eventually to the recipient, and delivered in first in, first out order,
which means that if one message is sent before the second message, then the first
message is received before the second message as well, and finally we'll
assume the processes do not fail. There are many variants of
the algorithms that we'll discuss, all the algorithms that we'll discuss
that are fault-tolerant variants and these are present in the literature, so
our first solution is a central solution. This uses a central master or
leader which is elected using one of our leader election algorithms that
you have seen elsewhere in the course. The master keeps a queue of waiting
requests from processes who wish to enter the critical section. The master also has a special
message called the token message. Access to the token message allows the
holder to access the critical section so the token message is
a very special message. It's like cash, if you have it then you
can use it whether you're a good person or whether you're a thief. So when a process wants to access
the critical section it calls the enter function where it sends
a request to the master, and then it just waits in a loop for
the token from the master. When the processes receives the token,
it enters a critical section and hangs onto the token. When it's done with the critical section
it calls the exit function wherein it simply sends the token back to the master. What data structures does the master
maintain, and what does it do? Well when the master receives
a request from a process Pi, if the master currently has a token,
it simply sends a token to Pi, which gives Pi access to
the critical section. If the master does not have the token, this means that some other process has the
token, and in this case the master ends up queuing the Pi request alongside other
requests that may also be waiting. When there are other process that have
access to the critical section releases the token, this token is
received back at the master and the master then looks at its queue. If the queue is not empty it
takes the head of the queue, some process Pj,
whose request was sent and queued there and this process Pj is
then sent a token which gives it access. 'Kay, and notice that this process
Pj's request will be removed from the queue after it's sent the code,
after it's sent the token. However, the queue is empty, this means
that there are no outstanding requests and the master can then hang on to
the token at this point of time. So, let's analyze this algorithm, so
why does this algorithm guarantee safety? It guarantees safety because
it is exactly one token and only access to the token gets you
access to the critical section. What is guaranteed liveness, liveness is guaranteed if every
request is granted eventually. This is guaranteed because there are at
most N processes in the system and so if your request is queued at the master
there's going to be at most, N minus 1 requests ahead of you and so when each
of the requests finishes, because there are no failures and eventually when
your turn comes at the head of the queue, you will get access to the token and
the critical section. The ordering guaranteed here is FIFO,
in the order received at the master so if your request came in slightly earlier
than your friend's request at the master, then you will get access to the critical
section just before your friend's request, so those are correctness properties. What about performance properties? There are two requirements from
mutual exclusion algorithms. One is that they involve few messages, which means that they are incurring lower
overhead on the network itself, and second is that they incur low delays at the
clients that access the critical section. This means that the overhead of
access in critical sections and releasing them is fairly low. There are three metrics
that capture these. The first is bandwidth, which is simply
the total number of messages sent in the enter and exit functions. The client delay and
synchronization delay are as follows. The client delay is a delay incurred by
a process when there is currently no other process in the critical section, 'kay, which means that right now
there's no one in the critical section, one process comes a long and says, hey,
I need access to the critical section. How long does it take that process
to get into the critical section? The synchronization delay is the delay
between one process releasing the, the critical section, that is,
calling the exit function and the next waiting process getting access
to the critical section, 'kay, so we assume that there's only one resea,
releasing process and of course, and there is only one waiting process for
the synchronization delay. So, let's analyze the central
algorithm for this. Bandwidth once again for
the enter operation only involves the requesting process
sending a request to the master, and it receives a token back so
that's two total messages, no matter when these messages happen,
but that's two total messages. For the exit the requesting process or
the process in the critical section simply sends the token back to the master,
so that's one message for the exit. For the client delay, the master is has a token because there's
no one in the critical section and the requesting process sends a request to
the master which sends it back the tokens so that's two message latencies or
one round trip time. Synchronization delay the process
in the critical section exits the critical section by sending
the token to the master. So that's one message transmission,
then the master sends the token forward, to the next process in the queue,
which is another message transmission. So that's two message latencies for the synchronization delay,
in the central algorithm. So the master of course here is
the performance bottleneck because it could get overloaded with a lot of
requests and also if the master fails then you have a single point of failure,
which means that until this new master is elected you cannot
serve any mutual exclusion requests. So, our next algorithm tries to address is
eliminating the master all together and instead using a ring. Here we organize all the processes in
the system into a virtual ring where each process can talk to its
successor in the ring. Typically, this is a clockwise successor,
so for instance N3's is N3 is a process,
its successor is N32. It can send messages to N32. N32 is another process in the ring which
can then send messages to it's successor N5 and so on and so forth and
the ring loops around. We have a special message called
a token message shown as a blue message here on this slide. The process that has the token
message at any point of time can enter the critical section. No other process can enter
the critical section, so N3 currently has access
to the critical section. It, if it chooses so, can access the
critical section at this point of time. When it's done, it can pass on
the token to its successor in the ring. At this point of time, no one can access
the critical section anywhere in the loop, because the token is in transit,
it's on the network. But when N32 receives the token,
it can then access the critical section. If it's not interested, it simply
passes on the token to its successor. So once again,
we have N processes in a virtual ring. Each process can send a message
to its successor in the ring. There is exactly one token in the ring. In order to enter a critical section you
simply wait until you get the token. There is nothing you can do to
actively seek out the token. When you're done with the critical when
you're in the critical section you hang on to the token. When you're done with
the critical section, you simply pass on the token
to your successor in the ring. If you get the token, and you're not
interested in the critical section, meaning that you're not
in the enter function, then you simply pass on the token
immediately to your successor in the ring. So, why does this
guarantee guarantee safety? Well, there is exactly one token and
for the same reasons as in the central mutual exclusion algorithm
safety is guaranteed here. Liveness is guaranteed because there is a
finite a number of process in the ring and the token eventually loops around and
reaches a requesting process. This of course assumes no failures, which means that the token is not lost and
that the ring stays intact. Bandwidth, per enter operation there's
only one token message received by the requesting process, however the other
N minus 1 processes might have to put an effort in transporting
the token around. So the total number of
messages per request might be as high as N throughout the system. There is, of course,
just one message per exit operation, where the process passes on the token
to its successor in the ring. What about performance? Let's look at client delay. Client delay means that there is currently
no one in the critical section and suddenly, one process comes up and
says, aha, I need access to the critical section. The best case is when this process
already has access to the token. In which case, the number of
message transmissions is zero. The worst case is when this, the process
that just requested access in the critical section has just passed on the token
to its neighbor or to its successor. In this case the token now needs to ma, make it's way around the other N minus
1 processes because in a system of N processes in a ring, you have N links, and
this means N message transmissions for the token to come around, and
that's the worst case, so the client delay could be anywhere
between 0 to N message transmissions. What about synchronization delay? Synchronization delay means that
one process releases the token and one of the processes somewhere in
the ring is waiting for the token. The best case is just one message
transmission where the waiting process is the successor of the releasing
process which means that the, the, the token makes only one hop before
it gives access to the critical section. The worst case is when the process that is
waiting is the predecessor of the process that is releasing the token. In this case the token needs to make its
way around the ring in a clockwise manner to reach the requesting process, and that's N minus 1 message transmissions
in a system of N processes in the ring. 'Kay, so the synchronization delay could
be anywhere between 1 to N minus 1 message transmissions, so
we solved somewhat the the bottleneck problem with the central mutual exclusion
algorithm, but the client delay and the synchronization delay have gone up to
the other N, in the ring-based approach. The question is, can we do,
can we do better than this? Can we lower this kind of
synchronization delay further? And the answer,
we'll see in the next lecture. [MUSIC]