In this lecture,
we'll discuss Kelips, which, uh, brings
constant lookup cost, uh, to, uh,
a distributed hash table. So in Kelips,
unlike in Chord and Pastry, which we have seen before,
we don't use a virtual ring. Instead we use affinity groups. There are k affinity groups. These are, of course,
virtual groups, and k is about square root of n, where n is the number
of peers in the system. Each node or each peer
is hashed to a group. Essentially, you take hash using, say, SHA-1, uh, and then you take modulo k, k being an integer. And so, say, a peer with, um, uh, peer ID 160 would get hashed to group #1 because that's what
hash mod k gave it, um, and, uh, uh, peer, uh, number 18 gets hashed
to group #1, and so on and so forth. Every peer belongs
to exactly one group, which is obtained,
uh, in a consistent way by hashing
and then taking modulo k. Now what are the neighbors
that each peer maintains? Well, the peer knows about all the other peers
in its own affinity group, so 160 would know
about all the other peers in its own affinity group,
such as 15. In addition, uh, 160
would know about, uh, th-uh, one contact member
in each of the other, k-1 affinity groups. So, since there are n
affinity groups... sorry, square root of n affinity groups and n peers, each affinity group contains, on average, square root of n peers, so that's the square root
of n local affinity group, uh, neighbors. And also, since k =
sqa-square root of n, um, each peer has
square root(n-1) contacts, in each of the other
affinity groups. That's a total
of 2*square root of n on average, uh, neighbors that each peer needs to maintain. You might think "Well, that's
much larger than log n," but we'll come
to that in a moment. Let's just put that
off for a while. Let's just go with it. Where is a file get stored? Unlike in Chord and Pastry, the files do not get stored at the nodes
in the affinity groups. Instead, they get stored
at whichever peer uploaded them just like Napster or Gnutella. Instead, what gets stored
in an affinity group is meta-information, so you decouple
the file replication location from the file querying. Uh, so, uh, the, um, uh, each file name is hashed to a group, so you take the file name
and hash it to a group. affinity group, say the file is PennyLane.mp3, it hashes to group k-1. All the peers in affinity
group k-1, uh, store, uh, PennyLane.mp3
along with information or a pointer
to whoever has the file. This would, for in-
for instance, be an IP address and port number pair. Again, you are replicating
this information completely within
the affinity group, so this might be
a very high overhead, but again, you're not
replicating the file itself; you're only replicating
meta-information about the file, which is very, very small, typically just a few bytes
or few tens of bytes. The affinity group- or none of the peers
in the system store the files themselves. So, how do you lookup
for a particular file? Suppose you want to look up
for PennyLane.mp3. Well the first thing
you do is you hash it and find its affinity group,
by taking modulo k. With that you get k-1. Say node 160 is the one that's, uh, trying to, uh,
find this particular file. Then it goes to its
contact for group k-1, in this case 167
is the group contact and it immediately fetches
the tuple for PennyLane.mp3 and it knows where
to locate the file. So this is essentially, in the best case it's just
a 1 round-trip-time, uh, lookup cost,
uh, for the file itself. However the contact may be down. Because of churn, 167
may not be there in the system, in which case 160 would ask one of its own
affinity group neighbors, if its contact in group k-1
was in fact alive. So, the lookup cost might go up
to 2 round-trip times, but not a whole lot more. And in fact, going back
to the previous one, the 160 to 167, uh, choice,
the choice of the contact, uh, need not be a random one. Among all the, uh, affinity
group members in, uh, k-1, 160 could select that
affinity group member that is the closest to it, in the underlying round-trip-time in the underlying internet, and that means that this hop could, in fact, be a very quick hop in the system. Essentially, what
the system Kelips is doing is that it is replicating
meta-information enough across the entire, uh, uh, uh, um, network so that
at a querying peer- any querying peer, you can obtain information
about any file from one of your neighboring, very nearby peers, uh, nearby
in the internet round-trip, uh, time, distance space. So the lookup cost is, uh, in the best case
it's one hop, and even when you have failures
it's just a few hops. Essentially, it's
O(1) lookup cost. Now the memory cost,
we return to the memory cost, returning- the memory cost
is O(square root(. You maintain square root( uh, neighbors inside
your affinity group and square root(contacts. You may also need to maintain, uh O(square root(information uh, meta-information for files that are inserted, um, uh, and, uh, and mapped
to your affinity group. However, square root( is fairly small. Uh, if you do
the calculation numbers, uh, just for
the membership information, uh, for 100,000 nodes in your system, square root(, uh, neighbors, uh,
both in affinity group and across affinity
group contacts, turns out to be just under
2 megabytes for 100K nodes, and also including 10 million files stored in the system. This is much smaller than, the amount of memory
that's available on most Component Off The Shelf, or COTS machines today, uh, the workstations
and laptops that are running, uh, these peer-to-peer systems. Even if I increase, uh, this by a, uh, order of magnitude, a couple of orders of magnitude, it still would fit
within a few gigabytes of RAM, uh, in, um, most
of these machines. Essentially, this means that, all of this information
about neighbors, uh, as well as the
meta-information about files can be maintained
completely in memory and, uh, therefore the lookups can be, um, uh, fairly fast. How do you update these
neighbors that you have? Well, um, you- uh, you would
see, uh, gossip-based, uh, protocols, uh, elsewhere
in this particular, uh, course, and gossip-based membership is the technique that is used, uh, here to update
these membership lists. It's used both within
the affinity group and also across
the affinity groups. Therefore, when a member fails it's uh, the time to disseminate
information about it to the affi-to the entire system
is O(log(N)). However, even if information
is out of date, uh, Kelips, uh, this system works just fine because it has other ways
to find information. Chord and Pastry have, uh,
a shortcoming, which is that because they use roots
to route a message, if any one
of those intermediate, uh, uh, uh, nodes has failed, you still need to find, you still need
to continue using that. You can't really backtrack. Uh, uh, you still need to find maybe, another successor if your next hop successor
has failed. In Kelips you have many,
many different choices. If your direct contact, for the destination affinity group is not alive, you ask one of your own
affinity group members. If that doesn't have,
uh, an alive, uh, contact, you ask another
affinity group member. Maybe you ask one of your
contacts in the oth-another, in another affinity group for its contact
in the k-1's affinity group. You have a variety of different
things that you can do, and the querying node has
a lot of flexibility on it because the, uh,
the depth of the search, uh, uh, space here is short
because it's just a few hops. The querying node
gets back a response or a fail response
fairly quickly, and it can decide what
to do and how to, um, uh, uh, try another path to get to the destination affinity group. Also, because all you're
trying to do is hit one, uhh, target, in the target affinity group k-1, not just a specific one,
like 167, you're trying to hit any one. If you hit 76 you're fine, 76 would have information
about the file because that meta-information
is replicated across the entire affinity group. If you hit 18,
that will be fine too, so any, uh, member of the k-1 affinity group would be okay, uh, to locate information
about this file PennyLane.mp3. Um, in addition,
the information about these, uh, files may get very large, so you don't want
to keep them around forever. The way Kelips de-deals
with this is that it times out and deletes the information about files. So, if you have a file
that is stored in the system, you need to periodically
send out heartbeats to keep that information,
uh, a fresh. So this heartbeating is very
similar to the gossip style, uh, heartbeating that is used for the membership, uh, and, uh, if you don't heartbeat a file, if you don't refresh
the file periodically, then meta-information about it, uh, will slowly disappear from the system
and will go away, uh, from the system,
uh, forever. The advantage
of this is, of course, uh, that, uh, you never need
to delete files to simply, you simply stop sending heartbeats for that file, and meta-information
from that file will disappear, uh, quickly, uh, over time across all the nodes
in the system. So there is a range of tradeoffs between Chord, Pastry,
and Kelips. The range, uh, uh,
involves memory, lookup cost,
and background bandwidth. So Kelips uses, uh, slightly
more memory than Chord or Pastry and slightly more
background bandwidth, to keep neighbors a fresh, but it has a much shorter
lookup cost, which is O(1). So while Chord or Pastry have
O(log(N)) for all, uh, for both memory and lookup, Kelips has, um,
O(square root(N)) for memory and O(1) for lookup cost. Uh, and so you have a tradeoff, and this gives you a good, uh, range of choices to choose from. So wrapping up our discussion
on P2P systems, we have studied both
widely-deployed P2P systems, uh, such as Napster
and Gnutella, which were two of the first popular peer-to-peer systems; uh, Fasttrack,
which is an underlying, uh, which is a proprietary, uh, peer-to-peer system underlying many, popular peer-to-peer systems such as Kazaa, Kazaalite and Grokster, some of which
have been shut down, uh, due to court cases since; and also we
have seen BitTorrent. We have also studied, peer-to-peer systems that
were developed in academia, and the advantage of this, of these systems is that they have provable properties. You can analyze their
lookup cost, their memory, their overhead,
their stabilization time, uh, and they, uh, they are trying to solve the problem of, uh, distributed hash tables, uh, which is a well defined, uh, problem that tries to make inserts, lookups and deletes, uh, very efficient. There we have discussed
three systems. Chord, which was developed by researchers from
MIT and Berkeley. Pastry, that was developed by researchers from Microsoft Research and Rice University. And, Kelips, that was developed by researchers from
Cornell University.