So, uh, when we discussed
the design of Cassandra in the previous lecture, uh, we use
this magic value of X, which, uh, is,
uh, specified by the client alongside every
read or write query, and X specifies
the number of replicas that the coordinator waits for until, uh, it can return
either a read value or an acknowledgement
for the write for the client. How do you set this value of X? Well that brings us
to the discussion of, uh, the famous theorem known
as the CAP theorem. The CAP theorem was proposed
by Eric Brewer from Berkeley, and was subsequently
proved theoretically by Gilbert and Lynch,
um, from, uh, NUS and MIT. Uh, and basically it
says the following: uh, in a distributed system, uh,
there are three properties that are considered
to be very important. Uh, typically this
is for a storage system. Um, and unfortunately,
in a, uh, distributed system such as an asynchronous distributed system, you can only satisfy, at most, two out
of these three properties. You can't guarantee
all the three. The three properties are: consistency, availability,
and partition-tolerance. Consistency essentially says
that even though there are multiple clients that are
reading and writing the data, uh, all the clients,
uh, see the same data at, uh, at any given
point of time. Uh, and that the reads,
uh, by any client return, uh, the latest written value
by that particular client. Availability says
that the system allows, uh, read and write operations
on all the keys all the time, and these operations return
very, very quickly. Partition-tolerance says that, uh, when the system
is, uh, partitioned, when the network is
partitioned into say two parts that cannot talk
with each other, the system continues to work and, uh, guarantee both the
consistency and the availability that we outlined earlier. So the CAP theorem
essentially says that you cannot guarantee
all the three, you have to choose, at most,
two out of the three. So why are
these three important? Before we discuss
the actual CAP theorem, and so let's look at why consistency, availability,
and partition-tolerance are really important. Availability refers,
uh, to the fact that, uh, first of all, you can read and write keys all the time, and also that reads and writes complete reliably
and very, very quickly. Well, quick-the quickness
in, uh, reading and writing is very important because
it essentially translates to revenues
for today's businesses. Measurements, for instance,
have shown that a 500ms increase in latency for operations
at Amazon.com, um, uh, or at Google.com cause a 20% drop in,
uh, the numbers of users that, uh, come
into that particular site. And this results in essentially
a 20% drop in the revenue for that particular,
uh, company. At Amazon.com, um, each added
millisecond of latency resulted in six million, uh, uh,
dollars of, uh, loss per year. And this is an enormous amount. And again, this is really
why these companies care for availability. They care to make the latencies as small as possible
for all reads and writes. Uh, so service level agreements, uh, or SLAs, which are typically written by providers, uh, for any of their customers,
uh, for instance, Amazon webservices
might have SLAs that it provides to Netflix, which uses Amazon
webservices infrastructure, um, uh, SLAs, uh, predominantly
deal with latencies that the customers, uh, want
the provider to, uh, guarantee. So why is consistency important? Um, uh, consistency essentially
says that all nodes see the same data at any time and that reads
returned by a client refer to the latest writes
to that key. Well, when you access your
bank or investment account by a multiple, uh, client
such as your laptop, your workstation, your phone or your tablet, you want all the updates
to reflect, uh, uh, in all the devices. You don't want, uh, to update
something from your tablet and then immediately
go to your workstation and find that that update has not been reflected
on your system. Also when you have multiple
clients reading and writing, uh, the same set of, uh, keys, um, uh, for instance when you have thousands
of customers and client machines that are trying to book
the same flight, you want
the same consistent information, uh, reflected
to all the clients. You don't want some clients
to see only two seats available, other clients to see only
to-uh, one seat available. You don't want two different
clients booking the same seat, uh, on the same flight. And again, partition-tolerance,
the third one of, uh, the CAP, uh, is, uh, important
because partitions can happen across data centers when
the internet gets disconnected. This may happen
during internet router outages, it may happen
because the under-seas je-se-Atlantic internet
cables get cut, uh, or because the DNS or the
Domain Name System doesn't work, or because of censorship, because of, uh, uh,
certain governments. Partitions can also occur
within a datacenter. For instance, uh, uh, rack
switch might go out, which means that all the servers
in that rack are, uh, for now,
uh, disconnected from the rest of the work. And in spite of this partition,
these partitions occurring, you still desire the system
to continue functioning, uh, normally, and providing
consistency and availability under these partition scenarios. So the CAP theorem says that again you can
only, uh, get three, only at most
two out of these three: consistency, availability,
and partition-tolerance. Since partition-tolerance
is really, really important in today's, uh, uh, uh, world
and because partitions do occur, uh, let's say the P
is really, really required. Essentially this means that,
uh, the CAP theorem implies that you have to choose between either consistency
or availability in today's systems. So Cassandra, which is the system we have been discussing so far, uh, always
chooses availability. So it chooses availability A, and partition-tolerance P. Which means that it has
to punt on the consistency. It can only provide weaker forms
of consistency, and it provides a weak form known
as eventual consistency. Cassandra does not provide
strong notions of consistency. Traditional relation databases, uh, prefer strong consistency instead over availability or insert availability whenever
you have a partition. Okay, so this is a-a market
change, uh, a sea change, uh, in these new generations
of key-value stores. So, uh, the CAP trade-off
has been the starting point for the NoSQL revolution, uh, once again
it says that you can get, at most, two
out of three of C, A, and P. Uhm, and-so if you draw
a triangle where you have consistency, availability,
and partition-tolerance at the three edges
of the triangle, different systems that exist
can be put at different points on the spectrum. So relation databases prefer
consistency and availability in in the-in scenarios, uh,
where they are single server and they really don't care
about partitions. Okay, so when you don't have
multiple servers, you can provide both C and A. However, Cassandra, and also
other, uh, key value stores, such as RIAK, Dynamo
and Voldemort, uh, prefer availability
and partition-tolerance, and they provide weaker notions
of consistency. Other NoSQL systems such as HBase, HyperTable,
BigTable, and, uh, Spanner, where, um, uh, BigTable and
Spanner are both from Google, prefer consistency
as well as partition-tolerance, and they might have, uh,
weaker notions of availability when there are, uh, partitions
that can happen in the system. So what is eventual consistency
which is provided by Cassandra, what does it really mean? Eventual consistency essentially
says the following: given a key, suppose all
the writes to that key stop. Then all the replicas
of that key, uh, all the values that
are mating on the server side, will eventually converge
to, uh, the latest write that has been written
to that particular key, okay. Typically the latest write, it doesn't need
to be the latest write, it is some one value. Essentially is says that all
the values uh, need to converge um, uh, to being the same value. Um, again this is the
theoretical definition, um, uh, the, uh, reality though is that writes
will continue coming, they'll keep coming
to the system. Uh, if this is the case, then the system will always try
to keep converging, that's what eventual consistency
always tries to do. Essentially you have a, um, uh, uh, a front wave of the
latest writes that are going on in the system and then you have
a, um, a moving later wave of updated
values of the replicas and the moving wave is always
trying to catch up to that, uh, front wave. Yeah, and if the writes,
uh, become slow at some point of time, uh, then, uh, the moving wave
will catch up, uh, to, uh, the latest values. However, because the moving wave
is always lagging behind, is oftentimes lagging
behind the front wave, uh, some reads might
return stale values, uh, to the clients,
uh, for instance, if there are many
back-to-back writes and, uh, mechanisms we-
that we have discussed, like the read repair,
uh, don't have, uh, time enough to catch up, uh, uh, to the front wave itself of updates, then, uh, the, um, uh, then some
of the reads from clients may return,
uh, the staler values, older values that replicas. So, uh, relation databases, uh,
provide what is known as ACID, these are very strong,
uh, guarantees, uh, ACID stands for Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation and Durability. We'll discuss these
later on, uh, in the course. Uh, ah, in comparison, key
value stores like Cassandra are reputed to provide, uh, the
opposite of ACID, which is BASE. Uh, this is sort
of a tongue-in-cheek, uh, terminology, uh, but it-it
seems to make sense here. BASE stands
for Basically Available Soft-state Eventual Consistency. Uh, basically available you
know, because Cassandra, uh, wants to always support
reads and writes, no matter what happens
in the system, soft state refers
to the fact that it maintains a lot
of in-memory information, especially like the mem tables that we have already discussed. Eventual consistency, like we
have discussed, ensures that, uh, when, uh, writes stop
or become slow, then all the replicas
of a given key will converge
to the same value. Again, uh, Cassandra prefers
availability over consistency when it comes
to partition-tolerance. Now, back to Cassandra. Let's look at the value of X. So how do you specify
the value of X for a given read or a write? Uh, the value of X is what is known as a consistency
level in Cassandra. The client is allowed
to choose the consistency level for each operation,
a read or a write, for any key,
uh, that it sends out. So for each operation
that the client sends out, it can specify a given consistency level for that particular operation. If the consistency level is ANY, this is an allowed consistency level by Cassandra, it means that
any server can store that particular, uh, write, um, and then return immediately to, uh, the, uh, uh, client. This is really useful
because it's the fastest, even if all the replicas
are down, the coordinator simply caches, uh, the write
and returns immediately, um, to, uh, the, um, uh,
to the, uh, client, okay. So this is the fastest. The slowest, on the other hand,
is the consistency level of ALL. This says that all the replicas if there are three replicas
for a given key, then all the replicas
need to acknowledge to the coordinator
before the coordinator can say that the write has been done and return and acknowledgement
to, uh, the client, okay? This ensures the strongest
consistency because essentially, uh, it ensures that
all the replicas acknowledge, and all the the replicas
have gotten the latest write, uh, before an, uh,
an acknowledgement is sent back
to the client. But of course, it's the slowest, because some of the replicas may respond slower than others, and essentially
you end up waiting for the slowest replica,
uh, among the group. Uh, so in between ANY and ALL, uh, is a spectrum
of consistency levels. Along the spectrum lies ONE, where you say
that the coordinator, uh, needs to receive back
a, uh, an acknowledgement from any ONE of the replicas, uh, this is again different
from ANY because ANY applies, a-a-allows even
the coordinator to store, uh, the, uh, the written value before returning
an Ack to the client, ONE does not allow that. ONE, uh, says that
at least one of the replicas must return an Ack,
uh, to the coordinator before it's returned back,
uh, to the client. This is of course,
faster than ALL, uh, but it cannot
tolerate a failure, so if all the replicas fail,
then, for instance, then ONE will result
in a write operation that fails. Um, QUORUM y-uh, says
that, uh, the coordinator needs to, uh, receive
a quorum of replies, uh, from replicas before it Acks
back, uh, to the client. What is a QUORUM? We'll see on the next slide. By the way, uh, in this slide
I have so far discussed the consistency levels, uh,
as far as writes are concerned, all the consistency levels
we have discussed can also be applied to reads, um, uh, the consistency level essentially specifies how many replicas the coordinator needs to hear from before it returns the latest time stamp value to the client. So let's look
at what a QUORUM is. So Quorum, essentially, uh,
in, uh, the simplest terms, a quorum refers, uh, to, uh, at least a majority, at least 50%. So suppose I have a quorum,
um, of, uh, say, suppose I have a group
of, uh, five replicas, for a given key value pair, so each of these,
uh, servers are storing, uh, uh, a copy
of the key value pair, a quorum is at least 50%,
essentially a quorum is at least three out
of the five, uh, replicas. So, I have one quorum here, the
blue quorum, and another quorum, the red quorum over here. Suppose, um, uh, a Client 1
does a write in the red quorum, meaning that it updates, the coordinator updates
these three, uh, replicas in the red quorum, uh, and then returns
an Ack to the client. A client two subse-Client 2 subsequently does a read, and the, uh, the read also does a, uh, also uses quorum and it does, uh, the read
in the replicas of the blue quorum using
these three replicas. Now because a quorum is at least
50%, any pair of quorums, any two quorums, such as the red
quorum and the blue quorum over here, will intersect
in at least one server. Okay, that's guaranteed to you. So this server over here, which is common to both the red
and the blue quorums will return the latest written value,
um, uh, to that particular key. Okay, so, uh, quorums are nice,
because they don't require you to wait for all the replicas
to return an Ack. They are not as slow
as the ALL consistency level, however, um, uh,
they are, uh, giving you a fairly strong notion
of consistency almost as strong as, the uh,
ALL, uh, consistency level, um, um, uh, in spite of not
incurring that much of overhead. So quorums are very, uh,
interesting technique and a very important technique that are fairly fast, uh, essentially you send out
the write to all the replicas, all the five replicas, and whenever the first three
of them acknowledge, you can send back an acknowledgement to the client. Again, so it's fairly fast, uh, it's, um, uh,
not as slow as ALL, but it gives you a fairly
strong consistency guarantee, uh, that is the same as ALL. So, many key value stores such as Riak and Cassandra
use quorums, essentially the reads specify a,
uh, read consistency level of R, again the value of R  N, the total number
of replicas for that key. Uh, the coordinator waits
for R replicas to respond before sending
the result to the client. And in the background,
the coordinator checks the other N-R replicas to see if they have older values, staler values, and if so, then it initiates
a read-repair to bring them up to date. For writes, um, writes come
in two flavors, um, uh, we'll see
those two flavors, uh, the client again speficies, uh, the write consistency level, W  N, the number
of replicas for that key. Um, the client writes the value,
the new value, written value to the W replicas, and returns. There are two flavors, uh, the first flavor has
a coordinator blocking until the quorum is reached, and only when the replicas, uh, acknowledge to the coordinator does it return an Ack
to the client. The asynchronous, uh, instead has, uh, the coordinator returning an Ack immediately to the client
and then thereafter very find that the, uh, um,
write consistency level is reached by insuring
that at least W replicas, uh, Ack to the coordinator. This, uh, allows the client
to proceed with other reads and write operations, rather than waiting for all
the W, uh, replicas to Ack, uh, and it, um,
uh, offloads the responsibility of insuring that W replicas
have been written to the coordinator itself. So, you have a combination,
more the read replica count and the write replica count
and the values you choose for these, uh, insure either
strong consistency or not. So if you really want to insure
strong consistency in your system, then you wanna make sure
that the value of W+R>N, the number of replicas
for each key and that the value of W>(N/2), essentially, the second
condition here says, the, says that W+W>N. The first equation here,
insures that if you have a write quorum
and a read quorum they intersect
in at least one server, um, uh, among
the replicas of that key, and this insures that reads
will return the latest write. The second condition here
insures that if you have two write quorums then they
intersect in at least one, um, uh, uh, replica server
and this replica server will, uh, keep the latest value
of the write. Essentially, this is also used
for returning conflicts, if you have
two conflicting writes, then at least one server
detects that conflict. The values you select
for W and, uh, and R, really depend on your workload. So, for instance, uh, if you
have very few writes and very few reads, you want to select W
to be small and R to be small, so that they're fast
and, essentially, you don't, uh, expects too many conflicts, uh, in this system, uhm, you expect
that the-that the, uh, by the time the reads come along
all the, uh, replicas would have gotten updated, um, uh, and, uh, you choose
a small values of W and R for this. If you have read-heavy workloads
you want the reads to be fast, so you choose R
to be a small number, like one, but if you want to make sure that both of these equations
are satisfied, then you choose W to be N. 'Kay, this insures
that W+R>N. If you have
write-heavy workloads you choose both W and R
to be (N/2)+1, this satisfies
both the above equations, that we discussed, uh,
and, uh, it also makes sure that the writes don't need
to wait for, uh, N replicas, instead they only wait
for a quorum of replicas. Um, also, you can choose, um,
uh, for write-heavy workloads with, uh, only one client
writing per key, you can choose W
to be one, because essentially you don't have,
uh, multiple clients trying to write to a key but multiple clients might be trying to read, uh, from a key. So, in order to make sure
that reads are consistent and return the latest,
updated value, you set your read quorum,
uh, to be N. So, we've discussed
those three consistency levels. There are also other consistency
levels that Cassandra provides, uh, using the notion of quorums. Uh, the quorum consistency level in Cassandra, uh, says that, you need to get a quorum across
all the replicas in all the datacenters. Uh, so this means that,
if you have three datacenters, uh, each with, uh, three
replicas for a given key, then you need to get, um, uh, at least five
of those replicas, across all the datacenters, to return an Ack
before an Ack can be returned, uh, to the client. A local quorum says that,
you need to get a quorum in the coordinator's datacenter, uh, this is one of
the fastest versions of quorum, so again, using our, uh, example
of three, uh, datacenters each with three replicas
for the given key, the client typically contacts
one, uh, uh, coordinator, in one of the datacenters and that datacenter contains
three replicas for the key, if any of the two
of those three replicas, uh, send Acks
to the, uh, coordinator, the coordinator
can then send back an Ack to the client without waiting
for the other datacenters. Finally, each quorum says
that you need t- uh, uh, reach a quorum in each
of those, uh, datacenters. So again, using our example
of, uh, three datagen, three datacenters each
with, uh, three replicas, in order to make sure
that two replicas, in each of those datacenters, each of the three datacenters, uh, sends back an Ack, um, uh, to, uh,
the, uh, clients coordinator, so that then an Ack can be returned, uh, to the client. So this, uh, allows each
datacenter to, essentially, do its own quorum and it
supports hierarchical replies, where the replicas
in each datacenter re- uh, send a message back
to that datacenters coordinator and then that sends, uh, message back to- an Ack back, uh, to the clients coordinator in the clients,
um, uh, contact datacenter, and then that coordinator
can then send back an Ack to the client itself. So, Cassandra offers
Eventual Consistency but there are other kinds
of consistency models that are weak consistency models
that are out there too and that have emerged
in the last few years. Well really, they've not emerged, they've been around for many years, from the, uh,
notions of paddle systems and the area of architecture,
computer architecture, but in the last few years
they have, uh, started to emerge
in the area of key value stores and no sequel storage systems. We'll discuss that
in, uh, the next lecture.