So in this, uh, lecture we'll look at, uh,
the, um, architecture of, um, the No SQL system
called HBase. So, uh, Google's BigTable system was the first "blob-based" storage system that was introduced, and of course Google, uh, did not
open source the code, but they published
a paper on this. Uh, Yahoo! wrote an open-source implementation of this which came to be called
as HBase, um, uh, this is
a major Apache project today. A variety of companies use HBase including, uh, Facebook,
which uses HBase, uh, for one of it's internal,
uh, architectural stacks. Uh, HBase supports,
uh, basic API functions, uh, such as Get or Put
on a per-row basis. This is again
a Get or Put by key, just like key-value stores. You als-this also allows you
to scan by a row range, um, this allows you
to do range queries. For instance, you might fetch, uh, all the users whose names start-start with A and B. And also it allows you
to do MultiPuts where you put
multiple key value pairs into, uh, the, um, uh, system itself. Unlike Cassandra, which
preferred availability over consistency,
under partitions, HBase prefers consistency over availability, under partitions. So here is what the HBase
architecture looks like: you have a client over here which, uh, can send queries,
reads, and writes, uh, to the HBase system. Uh, the coordination between the
clients and the servers is done by a Zookeeper, which is a small group
of servers running a
consensus-like protocol uh, a
Paxos-like protocol which is, uh, which is elsewhere
in this course. Uh, the, uh, HBase system itself
has multiple HRegion Servers, uh, as you notice here. This is one HRegion Server
that's blown up, there might be
other HRegion Servers as well. The HRegion Server
might contain, uh, multiple, uh HRegions. Uh, one HRegion is
sown-shown over here. The HRegion itself might contain
multiple stores, one store is shown over here. The store, uh, might contain,
uh, multiple store files, and each store file
contains an HFile. The HFile is essentially a file that is stored
in the underlying HDFS, the same Hadoop
distributed file system that is used in Hadoop. The store in relation,
also contains a MemStore and a HRegion Server is
associated with an HLog, over here. There's also an HMaster, uh,
which, uh, uh, communicates with the Zookeeper and also
coordinates with, uh, the HDFS, uh, and, uh, I'll discuss
each of these, uh, individual, um, uh,
components in detail in the next slide. So the HBase Table,
when you have a table, you know a reg-a regular database table, the HBase Table
is split into regions. Um, uh, for instance,
essentially these regions are a collection of rows
in that HBase Table. Each of these regions
is replicated, uh, across, uh, servers
and split into regions because you don't wanna store the entire table, some tables might be large,
other tables might be small, you don't wanna store, uh, large
tables, um, uh, as one, you wanna split them
into regions so that they are
more manageable. Then you have a ColumnFamily. A ColumnFamily is essentially
a subset of columns within that, uh, table, and within that region, uh, with similar query patterns. Uh, essentially
it's within the tables, so all the regions
for a table contain, uh, the same set
of columns within, uh, their corresponding
Column Families. Uh, then for every combination
of, uh, region and ColumnFamily, so for every ColumnFamily within
a region, you maintain a store. Okay, and that's what you saw on the previous
architectural slide. Uh, each store
contains a MemStore, the Memstore is,
um, uh, uh, uh, uh, something that maintains
an in-memory, uh, version of the latest updates that
have been done to that store. This is like the MemTables we
discussed in Cassandra, when the MemTa- MemStore is, uh,
um, uh, full or when it is old it is flushed to disk. There are also StoreFiles which, um, uh, are maintained on a per store basis for each region. This is where
the actual data lives, and the store file
contains an HFile which stores
the actual data itself, and that is stored, uh,
in the underlying HDFS, okay? The Hfile is oriented
essentially like, uh, an SSTable from the Google's
BigTable system, and very similar to the SSTable that we saw from,
uh, in the Cassandra system. So here is what
an HFile might look like. The Hfile contains, uh, a lot of
data, uh, followed by more data, uh, and then there might be some
metadata, file information, uh, indices, and a trailer
information at the end. Let's blow up one of
these data pieces. So, um, uh, the data itself
contains a magic number to identify that uniquely, followed by a variety
of key value pairs. Let's blow up one
of these key value pairs. The key value pair contains, uh, information such as
the key length first, then the value lengths, and then the row length, so you know how many
bytes each of these contain. Then you have the row itself, uh, you have
the ColumnFamily length followed by
the actual ColumnFamily, uh, the column qualifier, um, uh, a timestamp when this
value was la-last written, uh, the key type,
and then the, uh value itself. The HBase, uh, treats this
entire, um, uh, uh, segment of, uh, entries shown
here as the HBase Key. So let's look at, uh, some
of these entries here. What is the row? The row, uh, eh, for, uh, a
particular application which maintains, for instance,
census information, might be the Social
Security number of that
particular individual. The ColumnFamily might be demogragric-demographic
information, so it might say
all the demographic information about that
particular individual. Uh, one of the columns
within the ColumnFamily might be the ethnicity
of that particular individual. Uh, uh, it might be
Asian-American or Caucasion or African-American, and
so on and so forth. So, whichever is, uh,
the ethnicity of that individual is maintained over here. Uh, so this is essentially a
hierarchic-hierarchical way of, uh, breaking down,
uh, a column, and specifying the
entire, uh, column itself. And you also have the timestamp
and the key type over here. So, how does, uh, HBase
maintain strong consistency? It does this by-by using a
write-ahead log, or a HLog. Again, the HLog is maintained on
a-on a per HRegion Server basis. So suppose a client sends in
operations for four different keys, a key one, key two,
uh, key three, key four. Uh, key one and key two might
be assigned to HRegion, uh, the first HRegion, and key three and
key four might be assigned to another HRegion. Sooo, the HRegion server
appropriately routes the, uh, operations
to the appropriate HRegion. Uh, when an HRegion receives an
operation such as for (k1), it first enters, um, uh, this,
uh, into, uh, uh, the HLog, and so it, uh, writes
an entry to the HLog before it writes to the actual, uh, MemStore itself. Uh, it does this so that, uh,
if there is a failure after writing into the log,
then you can, uh, replay this write by looking into your HLog. Okay, so this operation
is done first, and then the corresponding, um, uh, operation is sent to the store, which then writes
into the MemStore. Eventually, when the MemStore
is full, it's flushed into a store file, and that is stored
as an Hfile or HDFS. So when you do have a failure,
you just need to replay the log. Uh, after you recover from
your failure on bootup, um, uh, either the HRegionServer or the HMaster
does the following: it replays
any stale log entries, again, it uses the timestamps
to find out where the database
is with respect to the logs, and it replays any
of the log entries, um, uh, since the database timestamp itself. Uh, when you replay you add
edits to the MemStore, which eventually
will get flushed into, uh, the, um, uh,
HFiles themselves. Now when you can have Hrefs running across multiple data centers as well, uh, there is
a single master cluster of all the data centers. You have one
of the data centers marked as a "Master" data center. The other data centers are
simply "Slave" data centers, uh, and they replicate
the same tables. The Master cluster, uh,
synchronously sends the logs, the HLogs, over
to the Slave clusters, which then use the logs to simply update
the corresponding MemStores, which eventually get
flushed, uh, to disk. The coordination
among the Master and the Sl-and
the Slave clusters is done via Zookeeper again. And Zookeeper not just runs a
Paxos-like consensus protocol, it also can be used to store, uh, uh, information
just like a file system in a hierarchical fashion. So for instance, you
can use, uh, the address "/hbase/replication/state" to store the current state
of the database. You can use the address "/hbase/replication/peers/
<peer cluster number>" to store information about that particular master
or slave cluster. And then you can also store
the HLog, um, information in this, uh, third, um, uh, address, which is "/hbase/replication/rs/<hlog>"
itself. Essentially, Zookeeper
can be used as a naming system that maps this to the
actual location of the, eh, of that information itself. So, uh, to wrap up
our discussion of, uh, key value stores
and NoSQL storage systems, traditional database,
the relational database systems, uh, uh, work
with strong consistency and offer strong notions
of consistency such as ACID. But modern workloads don't
necessarily always need such strong guarantees, uh, what they do need is fast availability
or fast reads and writes, uh, or fast response times
to clients, because this is
directly correlated with, um, uh, revenue, uh,
to the companies that run cloud computing services today. Unfortunately, the CAP theorem
says that you cannot guarantee both availability
as well as strong consistency when you really care about
partition-tolerance: you have to choose
one or the other. Key-value stores
such as Cassandra offer BASE, which is basically available
soft-state eventual consistency, and essentially they punt on the
strong notions of consistency, just because the workloads don't
necessarily require them, but at the same time
they're able to grant, uh, very good, uh, response times, very fast response times. There has been
a lot of other work on stronger and stronger
notions of consistency that are closer and closer to the strong versions
of consistency, uh, while still offering
fast availability. We have discussed,
uh, the design of, uh, the Cassandra key-value store, and also the
HBase system which prefers, uh, consistency
over availability while Cassandra preferred availability over consistency.