Hi there, uh, so, uh, in this, uh,
next series of lectures we'll be looking at, uh, this, uh, interesting
class of protocols, called gossip protocols
or epidemic protocols. But first, let's start
from the problem statement and slightly far away from,
uh, where we want to be. Uh, the problem that gossip
is trying to solve is called, uh, the multicast, uh, problem. So what is multicast? Suppose you have
a group of, uh, processes or a group of nodes. Uh, again, each
of these processes or each of these nodes is potentially a process
at some host on the Internet or connected to the network. And essentially, weh-uh,
all we need is that these processes or nodes need to
be able to talk with each other by being able to send
and receive messages. So here I have, uh, a red node, which has a particular
piece of information, um, and they have, I have other blue nodes
in the group that want to receive
this piece of information. For instance,
these might be computers on the floor
of the New York Stock Exchange, and this red computer
might have, uh, or the red node might have information about a latest, uh, stock trade which it wants to get out to the other brokers, on the floor. This is the multicast
problem, okay. So this is the problem where, you want to get information out to other members in your group and, of course, here I'm showing only one multicast message, there might be multiple multicast messages going around at the same time, each of them from potentially,
a different sender. Now multicast is
as opposed to broadcast, where you have
a piece of information that you want to
send out to the, uh, entire network
where everyone, all the computers or all the nodes on the, uh, network, uh, want to receive
that piece of information. That's broadcast. Uh, multicast on the other
hand, is more restricted. It's only within
a particular group of nodes or group of processes. So what are the requirements
for multicast protocol? Well, two of the most
important requirements, uh, as far as cloud computing
is concerned, are fault tolerance
and scalability. Uh, the nodes themselves
may crash, because processes, after all, are failure prone, as we know. Uh, the packets may be dropped
by the underlying network. They might also be delayed
by the underlying network. And so, uh, you want your
multicast to be reliable and have all
the non-faulty recipients receive ah the multicast in spite of these failures and delays that might happen
in the underlying network. You also want to your multicast
protocol to be scalable, uh, and have
an overhead, per node, that does not grow very quickly, as the number of nodes
grows into the thousands maybe even, uh, much higher,
into tens of thousands or hundreds of thousands. So, the protocol that is executed at the individual nodes as well as, the senders, uh, uh, is, uh, what is known
as the multicast protocol. The multicast protocol typically
sits at the application level, meaning that it does not deal
with the underlying network, but this is not a given,
because oftentimes, the application level
multicast protocols also talk with the underlying network level, um, um, uh, techniques, uh,
such as IP multicast. Ah, again, IP multicast is what's available in the underlying, uh, network itself. Um, uh, typically
this is implemented in routers and switches. Um, it's not necessarily
an attractive alternative because even though
it's available it may not be enabled in many
of the routers and switches, and so, uh, most of the multicast protocols that are, uh, deployed out there today, even though some of them may leverage wha-IP multicast where it's, uh, uh, available, all of them,
most of them today, uh, are application level, meaning that, they involve processes
talking with each other, without really worrying
about what's, uh, going on
in the network underneath. So one of the simplest ways
of doing multicast, is a centralized approach. You have the sender,
it has a list of recipients, it simply goes through
those recipients, in say, a for- or while-loop and it sends each
of these recipients either, a UDP or a TCP packet
that contains the information. Uh the multicast message itself. UDP stands for
User Datagram Protocol. It is a, um, uh, uh
connectionless and unreliable way
of transporting messages, but it's cheap
and it's low overhead. TCP is
Transmission Control Protocol, which is a, uh,
connection oriented way and a more reliable way
of sending, uh, messages. You could choose
either one of these. This is, of course,
the simplest implementation. Now, uh, one of the problems
with this implementation is, uh, when it comes
to fault tolerance. If the sender fails when it's
halfway through its "4" loop, essentially,
only half the receivers, uh, would have received
the multicast. Also, the overhead
on the sender is very high. Imagine a group where you have thousands of, uh, nodes in the group and, uh, in that particular case, uh, the sender has, uh, to go through, uh, has to send
a lot of messages. And this also increases
the latency, uh, the average time for a receiver to receive a multicast, could be as high as, um, O(N), which is, linear in the size
of the group itself. So to address that, the Tree-based Multicast Protocols have been developed, essentially, all of these, uh, uh, protocols develop a spanning tree among the, uh, nodes or the processes in the group. Uh, these include,
network level protocols, such as, IP multicast, where the spanning tree's among the routers and switches, in the underlying network, but also application
level multicast protocols, such as, SRM, RMTP, TRAM, TNTP, and a whole bunch of others. Uh, so, m, first of all,
this is attractive because, uh, the, uh, if you build a tree,
uh, well enough, if it is say, a balanced tree, then with N,
uh, nodes in your group, the height of the tree
is O(log(N)) and this means that the latency for a message to reach, any of the nodes
in the group is O(log(N)) as opposed to centralized, where the latency might have been, as high as, O(N) Also, the overhead
on each member in the group, both the sender, uh, as well as, any
of the receivers, is constant, especially if, the number
of children is constant. Uh, essentially, you recieve one copy of the multicast message and you send it out- send out as many copies
as you have children. However, one of the problems
here is that you need to, um, uh, set up
and maintain the tree. When, uh, load failures happen,
uh, the uh, um, nodes in the system might actually not receive multicast, for a while. For instance, if, uh, if this node at-at the leaf fails, then, uh, that's the only node that's affected, when that node rejoins the tree, uh, it will start
to recieve multicast. However, if this node that's
closer to the root fails, then essentially,
you have a situation where, none of its descendants
will receive any of the multicasts
that are sent, uh, before, uh, this part
of the tree is repaired. Perhaps it is replaced
by another node or it recovers and rejoins the tree
at that particular position. So, uh, because, as you know, failures are the norm
rather than the exception, you're always
going to have situations where nodes are failing
all the time and you have to spend some amount of bandwidth and resources in co-continuously repairing the tree, all the time. So, a little bit more on the
Tree-based Multicast Protocols. Essentially, these, uh,
build a spanning tree among the processes
of the multicast group. They use a spanning tree
to disseminate the multicast. They might prefer IP multicast
where its available-available to, uh, do this
initial dissemination. Thereafter, they use
either acknowledgements, positive acknowledgements
or negative acknowledgements, uh, to repair the multicasts that are not received by the, uh, receivers. Positive acknowledgements
are often called as ACKs and negative acknowledgements are called as NACKs, Uh, for instance, the Scalable
Reliable Multicast protocol, the SRM, uses NACKs. Essentially, um, uh, when
a receiver has not received, uh, multicast messages that it is expecting or for a while, it sends a repair request
up towards, uh, the root of the tree, and when these repair requests are received, uh, nodes closer to the root
of the tree send, uh, the latest multicasts
that they have or the missing multicasts as far as the receiver is concerned. One of the issues with
tree-based protocols is that, uh, the, uh, ACKs
and NACKs might implode, meaning that there might be very large numbers of ACKs and NACKs. For instance, for multicast
where the initial dissemination was not very successful
and was received at very few, uh, nodes in the group. To avoid this, the SRM protocol
adds random delays, uh, at the receiver. So receivers when they realize
they need to send out a NACK, they don't send out
the NACK immediately. They wait for a little bit of
time and then they send it out. Uh, If they need to send
a NACK multiple times, uh, then they might use
an exponential backoff, meaning that, uh, they, uh,
wait for, uh, a period of time that doubles every time
they wait. Uh, also, the messages
that are sent out might also be subject
to exponential backoff. The RMTP, the Reliable Multicast
Transport Protocol, uh, ha-is similar,
but it's slightly different. Instead of using
negative acknowledgements, it uses
positive acknowledgements. So, uh, the receivers
periodically send a digest or a collection
of acknowledgements for all the multicasts
that they received so far, uh, and, uh, if any of the messages are missing from this, uh, from these ACKs, then those messages are sent downwards towards the receivers. Now once again, you can have
ACK storms here and, uh, to avoid these
ACK storms, uh, there are certain receivers marked as designated receivers and, uh, the ACKs are sent only to these designated receivers and then these designated receivers forward, uh, the, uh, corresponding multicast messages down the tree. However, there have been
studies that have, uh, analyzed the scalability
of these protocols and even, in spite,
of the random delays and en-and exponential backoff, uh, both these, uh, uh, clas-uh, both these types of protocols, both, uh, NACK based
and ACK based protocols still suffer from, uh, uh, uh, a large number of NACKs
and ACKs that are sent out and the number of these
NACKs and ACKs typically grows
linearly with the, uh, size of the group itself. So these protocols are not as
scalable as they were intended, uh, to be. So this motivates
the development, um, or the introduction
of our gossip based or epidemic based protocol.