In this lecture
we continue our discussion of how to implement
multicast ordering. Uh, in this lecture
we'll look at how to implement,
uh, causal ordering. Once again, just to remind you,
causal ordering ensures, uh, that if two multicasts are such that their, uh, send events are causally related, meaning that there
is a causal path between them, then, uh,
the, uh, received order of uh, those multicast messages, uh, should obey causality. In other words, if the
multicast send of a message M happened before multicast
message of a message- multicast send of a message M', then M should
be delivered first, and only then M' at all correct
processes in the system. So, uh, here's how
to implement causal ordering. Uh, each receiver, again,
maintains a vector of per-sender sequence numbers. Uh, these are integers. This is sort of like FIFO
multicast, uh, but the meanings of, uh, the, uh, um,
sequence numbers are different, and updating rules
are slightly different. Once again we have
processes P1 through PN. Uh, Pi maintains a vector, eh,
of N elements, uh, Pi[1...N]. Initially, all the elements
in the vector are zeroes. The jth element of Pi's vector
is the latest sequence number that Pi has received from Pj. This is very similar, again, to the FIFO example you have
seen in the previous lecture, but again, the interpretations and the updating rules
are going to be different. So here are the rules,
in all their gory detail, and then we'll see an example
that discusses these rules. So when you want
to send a multicast message, uh, at process Pj, uh, Pj looks at the jth element
of its vector and increments it by one, then it sends out
the multicast message. However, unlike FIFO
it includes the entire vector in the multicast message
as a sequence number. The entire vector is important
because we want to check for causality. We wanna make sure that
all the receivers are in fact obeying causality. So what do receivers do when they receive
a multicast message? When Pi receives
a multicast message from Pj, and there is a vector M
in, uh, the multicast message, which is the timestamp
of that multicast message itself then, uh, you buffer
that multicast message until two conditions are true. First, this is the next
multicast message that Pi is expecting from Pj. In other words, the jth element
of the message's vector is in fact one more than
the jth element of Pi's vector. So that's the first condition. Second, you wanna make sure that the receiver
satisfies causality. All the multicasts
anywhere in the group which happen
before this message M have already been received
at Pi, okay? In other words, you want
to make sure that for all k, uh, not equal, uh,
to j, the sender, the kth element
of the message's vector is less than or equal
to the kth element of the receiver
Pi's vector, okay? This makes sure that
the receiver has already seen all the multicast messages
on which Pi already depended, or in other words, all the multicast
messages that happen before M's. When these two conditions
are true, then you can deliver the multicast message M
to the application, and you can set the jth element of Pi's vector to the jth element
of M's vector, showing that this message
has been delivered. You do not update any
of the other elements of the-of the- of Pi's vector, because you
don't necessarily know of the other multicast messages that have been sent out in the group. So let's see an example again. Here is a timeline with four
processes, P1 through P4. Time runs from left to right. Each process maintains a vector. The vector contains
four elements, because there are four processes in the group. P1 sends out a multicast,
uh, which is received by all the other processes. Notice that P2 receives
P1's multicast first and then sends out
another multicast. So P1's multicast
here happens before; causally happens
before P2's multicast, and so we want to make sure
that these two multicasts are delivered in the same order
at all the recipients. Similarly, P1's multicast
is received at its P4, at P4, and then P4 sends out
a multicast, so again, these two multicast sends from
P1 and P4 are causally related. However, P2's multicast send
and P4's multicast send are concurrent, and so they
are not causally related. So let's look at the vectors. So P1 then sends out
a multicast, simply increments
its sequence number, which is
the first sequence number, and that entire vector 1
followed by three 0 is included as the sequence nu- as the timestamp of
the message when it is sent out. When receivers receive
this multicast message, they use this to check whether
or not to deliver the message. P2, when it receives
this message, in fact checks that this is
in fact the next, uh, vector is-it is expecting from P1, and it in fact
satisfies causality because all the vectors, all the elements, all
the other elements are 0, and so it can deliver
this multicast message from P1. P4, uh, the rule is likewise,
and can- it goes ahead and delivers P1's
multicast message. Now, when P2 sends out
its multicast, it increments the second element of its vector, so the vector
for uh, the time stamped vector for this multicast message
from P2 is 1,1,0,0. When P1 receives
this multicast message from P2, it sees that in fact this is the next sequence
number it is expecting from P2, and that the receiver
satisfies causality because all the other elements are identical to the incoming message, and so it can deliver
this multicast from P2. However, when P3 receives
this message from P2, it sees that the first element
in the incoming vector is one. However, the first element
in its local vector is 0. In other words, P3 has not yet
gone beyond the causality and has not yet received
some messages on which P2's send
is dependent upon. So because it is missing
the sequence number one from P1 uh, it buffers
this multicast message from P2. Subsequently, P4 sends out
the multicast message, which now has vector, uh,
timestamp of 1,0,0,1. P1 and P2 both
receive this message, and they are able to deliver it because the receiver
satisfies causality. You can verify
this for yourself. However, when P3 receives
this multicast message, it sees that it is missing, again uh, the message 1 from P1 which is included in
the incoming multicast from P4 because P4's first element is 1. However, P3's first element
is a 0, and so it buffers
this multicast from P4 as well. Uh, thereafter,
when P1's multicast is finally received at P3, it sees that this is in fact the next multicast message
that it needs to deliver, because causality is true, and so it updates its timestamp to be 1 followed by three 0, and at this point it can deliver
both P4's buffered multicast as well as
P2's buffered multicast. It can deliver these two
multicasts in any order, because these are, uh,
not causally dependent on each other, otherwise
the vectors would show it, and so it goes ahead
and delivers this, and it updates its, uh,
vector to be, uh, [1,1,0,1]. And finally of course P4
receives the multicast from P2 and it can go ahead and
deliver this multicast message and update its final vector
to be 1, 1 and, ah, 0 and 1. So, uh, that wraps up
our discussion of multicast ordering. Uh, the ordering
of multicast is important because it affects correctness of distributed systems that use multicast
as a building block. On the stock exchange floor, uh, you want to make sure that all the stockbrokers are receiving, uh, the stock trades in the same order as everyone else. Uh, this ensures fairness
in the marketplace. Uh, in, uh,
the air traffic control system, you want to make sure that all the, uh,
air traffic controllers' are seeing the updates
in the same order as all the other
air traffic controllers. This ensures correctness
and safety of the airplanes. There are three popular ways
of implementing ordering. Uh, these are, uh, FIFO,
or first-in, first-out, causal, and total ordering. We have seen what these mean. We have also seen how
to implement them. What we have not seen
so far is reliability and, uh, fault tolerance. What happens when, uh, some of
the processes in the group fail? How do we ensure that all the
correct processes in the group still continue
receiving multicasts? We'll see this in the next two
lectures, uh, in this series.