Okay, so in this, uh, next,
uh, series of lectures we'll be looking at the technical details
of grid computing. Uh, in this first lecture
we'll, uh, start with, uh, what grid applications typically look like. Uh, here is a sample application that you might want
to run on top of the grid. This application is called the Rapid Atmospheric Modeling System, uh, or RAMS. It was developed
at Colorado State University. It's kind of a nice name 'cause their sports team
is also called, um, uh, Rams. But in any case, RAMS
is essentially a, uh, meteorological application, which models weather phenomenon. So, in 1998, uh,
when a major hurricane, uh, the hurricane Georges
hit, uh, the U.S., uh, RAMS was used to model, uh, and predict the movement of, uh, the hurricane itself, and, um, uh, the predictions that RAMS had, uh, tallied with the actual, um, uh, occurrence
on the ground itself. And RAMS essentially used, uh,
a, um, uh, a grid spacing, um, a two-dimensional grid spacing with 5 kilometer, uh, spacing instead
of the usual 10 kilometers. It was able to do this because it used a fairly large number of processors. It used more than
256 processors. Essentially, this is an example, of a weather
prediction application, uh, so you know when you see weather forecasts on television, essentially, uh, all of the data that you are seeing, in fact, all
of the, uhwa, visualization and the simulations that
went into the visualization and the prediction, uh, are examples of high-performance
computing applications or computation-intensive computing applications. Uh, these are the kinds
of applications that might be run on the grid. So, HPC is a term that is used,
uh, to denote such applications, uh, which are high-performance
computing applications. Typically high-performance
computing application, uh, uses a lot
of the CPU resource, uh, because essentially, uhm, as compared
to data-intensive computing an HPC application, uh, would have
a lot more computation in compared to the data,
uh, that it transfers. So there is less data compared
to data-intensive computing, but a lot more computation,
uh, compared to data- uh, compared
to data-intensive computing. Now the question, uh, that, uh,
the grid, uh, answers is can you run such a program, such a large parallel, uh, program, uh, without access to a
supercomputer, without actually having access
to a machine that has 256 processors? Can you run it on resources
that are widely available anyway across multiple sites? And that's where
the grid comes into play. So here is what grid
resources might look like. Um, uh, a particular university,
say the University of Wisconsin, uh, -Madison, might have, uh, a
set of work stations which are typically used
by students, but, uhhmma, at certain times
of the day, like at night, for instance, uh, the work stations
are relatively free and they could be harvested
for running, uh, some of these, uh, tasks of your grid job. Um, a different site, MIT,
might have, uh, some work stations
like this, it might also have certain dedicated clusters. The National Center
for Supercomputing Applications at the University of Illinois might also have certain, uh, dedicated clusters to run it. In a sense, you have, uh, computation resources available at these three different sites, and what you want to do is you want to run your application, uh, across these
three different sites, using resources wherever
they're available, potentially using resources at multiple sites at the same time. So, this is what, uh, the resources
in the grid infrastructure, uh, would look like, typically. And again, here,
I've drawn only three sites, but of course, there might be many tens of sites involved in a grid,
uh, infrastructure. So what does an
application, uh, look like? So an application, that might be
quoted by a meteorologist or a physicist or a biologist would look something like this. It would essentially,
consist of several jobs. In this example, I have 4 jobs,
job 0, job 1, job 2, and job 3. Uh, and these jobs are connected
in a Directed Acyclic Graph or a DAG. In this case, you notice that, the output of job 0
serves as input to job 1, and some of the output of job 0 also serves as input to job 2. Similarly, the outputs
of job 1 and job 2, uh, these arrows over here,
uh, serve as inputs to job 3. So you have this
Directed Acyclic Graph. Now in this, uh, DAG,
uh, Directed Acyclic Graph, uh, jobs 1 and 2
can be run concurrently; so for instance, you wa-you might be able to run job 1 on the Wisconsin site and job 2 on the MIT site,
uh, parallely. So, a little bit more
on the details of this job. So, the data that goes
from one job to another, the output of one job, which
is the input of the next job, may be several gigabytes. Typically, it's not
much larger than this. However, the jobs themselves,
uh, may be very long lasting, so each of these jobs,
each of these nodes in this DAG, might take several hours
to several days. Uh, each of these, uh, jobs is computation-
intensive, of course. It uses a lot of the
CPU computing resource. Each job has essentially four,
m-maybe a fifth optional stage. There's the
initialization stage. There is a stage
in the phas-uh-s, uh, phase where it
brings in data from its predecessor jobs
in the DAG. There's execution phase,
which itself lasts for, um, uh, hours, sometimes days. There's a stage out, where it sends out data
to the next jobs in the DAG, and if the user requires, uh, certain, uh,
partial results, uh, intermediate results
from this job, those are published as well. These are computation-intensive
jobs which mean that, um, uh, which means that they are,
embarrassingly parallel, which means, that, essentially, they're processing some amoun-
uh, some amount data and they are doing
quite a bit of computing on it, but this data can be split up, uh, and, the entire compilation can be parallelized into tasks. So each job can, essentially,
be split into tasks, maybe thousands, uh, maybe even more tasks, and these, uh, tasks can be run, so that each task runs on one machine, or on one processor, somewhere. These tasks typically
do not talk with each other, because they are
highly parallelized. When they are done, they return
their results, uh, uh, to the job itself
which then aggregates it. So, the main question here
is a scheduling problem. How do you, given such a,
uh, DAG of, uh, jobs, each job consisting
of certain tasks, how do you schedule this horal-
overall application across, um, uh, the grid resource, which might be distributed out over, uh, the wide area?