Welcome to this
Cloud Computing Concepts course. In this lecture, we'll be covering several
concepts that are zoomed as a part of the topics that we'll be discussing
in the Cloud Computing Concepts course. So we'll be covering several of the basics
they are considered to be the basics in computer science. Typically some of these concepts are
concepts that computer science students learn in the first couple of years in
the computer science undergraduate degree program. So for those of you who are already
familiar with this material this could be a refresher or you could just
skip it if you already know this stuff. In any case, you can always use this
orientation lecture as a reference to keep coming back to if you encounter
a term during the regular lectures that doesn't make sense to you, or
that you'd like to be reminded about. So we'll discuss a few topics. We'll discuss some basic data structures,
what processes are. We'll discuss a little bit about computer
architecture, and then a little bit of math with big O() notation, basic
probability, and a few other basic topics. So let's get started here. So basic data structures, we'll
discuss two different data structures. The first one is a queue. A queue is essentially a first-in
first-out data structure. Elements of the queue
could be any data types, in this example here I have
elements that are in T years, so in this example right now the queue
has five elements, 3, 5, 8, 0, 7. This is an ordered list of elements. When you remove an element from the queue,
you remove it from the head of the queue. In this case, the head is the element 3. When you insert a new element,
you insert it at the tail of the queue, which means that if I insert
a new element, say 1, it's going to get inserted
right after 7 in this queue. So removal always come from the head, while insertion always
happens at the tail. So for instance, given this particular
queue consisting of five elements, if you dequeue or remove an item,
then that item would be 3. At that part of time,
the queue will only consist of 5, 8, 0, and 7, with the head pointing to 5. The next item that you dequeue or
remove will be 5. After that, the queue will
consist of only 8, 0, and 7. Then the next item that you dequeue
will be 8, and so on, and so forth. Dequeues, or removals, as well as
insertions can occur concurrently. So you can remove an element,
but at the same time, also insert an element at the tail. So that's a queue, which is
a first-in-first-out data structure. A different data structure is the stack, which is the first-in-last-out
data structure. Imagine a stack of dishes that you place
on your table, the dish that you put on the top, that you add the last will be
the first one that you're going to remove, all right, and that's essentially a stack. So remove, or also known as a pop,
happens from the top, and insert or a push also happens at the top. So, in this case, if you push a new
element into this particular stack, say 9, then 9 will go above 3. After that, if you pop or
remove an element that's going to be the last element that you added,
which is 9 in this case. The next pop after that will get 3,
because 9 was just removed, and 3 is now the top of the stack. After you remove 3, the next pop or
removal will get you 5, and so on, and so forth. After that, you get 8, and then 0, and 7. So once again, the removal always returns
you the last item that was added and insertion or push adds an item
right to the top of the stack. So these two data structures,
queue and stack, are used very widely in computer science, and in fact, we'll
be using the notion of a stack right away when we discuss processes soon in this
particular orientation lecture and stuff. What is a process? A process is essentially
a program in action, for instance, you might write a program in a language
like C, C++, Java, or Python,, or Ruby and [INAUDIBLE], whatever it is, it doesn't
matter what the language is, and when you execute that program,
say from the command line or from a GUI, that executing
program is called a process. For instance, here I have a C like
program, which has a function main, which in turn calls a method f1,
which in turns calls a method f2. This is shown pictorially
here f1 main calling f2. When you instantiate this program and
execute it, it becomes a process, which here in this case is labeled as P1. So this code part shown here
is only program itself, the process itself consists of
wonderful other components. The code typically doesn't change,
but the other components might change. What are these other components? Let's look at them one by one. First of all there is a program counter,
which is an index into the code, which says where the program is right now. What is the exact line
number with in the code, where the program is executing right now. Next you have a stack, which is used by the functions to
pass arguments and returned values. For instance, when the main function
calls f1 any arguments that it needs to pass to f1 are passed via the stack by
pushing an element on top of the stack. F1 can then pop that element off and obtain the arguments
that are passed to it. Similarly when f1 calls f2 it then pushes
on top of the stack, the arguments that it has for f2 and f2 can retrieve these
arguments by popping the top of the stack. When f2 is done,
it can return the return values to f1 also by pushing the return values on
top of the stack, so that when f1 resumes, it can pop the top of the stack to
obtain the return values from f2. Similarly, f1 returns its return values
to main by pushing on top of the stack. Now the functions themselves might declare
variables, some variance might be local variables, and local variables are also
typically maintained on top of the stack. I'm not showing them here, and
this is the reason why when a function or method is completed in its execution,
any local variables that are declared inside are then gone, because that
part of the stack has been popped. In addition, function that might
also create new memory by for instance calling myLocalNew. In this case, I'm showing such as a
variable x, and such variables are stored in a separate data structure associated
with the process known as the heap. Also, associated with
the heap are also registers, which typically refer to the recently
accessed variables in the process itself. So, for instance this variable
x is present in the heap. Such or new variables need to be
explicitly freed in most cases, however, some programming languages have
automatic garbage collection. Now the reason we are discussing
the process here is, really the main reason is that,
when we talk of distributed systems, we're going to talk about multiple
processes communicating with each other, and we'll mostly focus on process
to process communication, and then later on we will also talk
about how procedure calls or function calls can cross
process boundaries. In addition, the other reason we're
discussing the process here is that when we take a snapshot of a process, when I
say a process takes it's own snapshot, this essentially includes everything
that I'm showing here on the slide, and maybe a few more elements. It includes the code, the program counter,
the current status of the stack, the current status of the heap, and the
registers, and then a few other elements. Essentially this information is enough to
resume this process from here onwards. Speaking of computer architecture, let's discuss a simplified
version of computer architecture. Computer architectures today
can be very complicated, but typically when we think of how a process
executes on a computer architecture, we can think of the simplified view. So there's the CPU,
which executes the actual instructions, which are present in your code. There are also a bunch of registers
that are code located with the CPU. These are small pieces of memory that
can be accessed very quickly by the CPU. Typically there's only
a small number of registers, typically not more than
a few tens of registers. There is also a cache, which is a slightly
larger memory than the collection of registers, and the larger a piece of
memory is, the slower it is to access it. So accessing a cache is slower than
registers The next is registers but accessing the cache is still pretty fats. Then beyond the cache there is the main
memory or the Random Access Memory or the RAM,
which is even larger than the cache and the memory itself, therefore, it's slower
than the cache but still it's pretty fast. And then, finally, there is the hard disk
or if you would like solid state drive, flash driver or whatever, which is
a lot more memory than the main memory. But of course, it's much slower. So as you go up from disk to memory, to
cache, to registers, the speed increases. The total amount of storage
space that you have decreases So when you write a program such as C++,
or Java, or C and you compile that it gets compiled
to low level machine instructions. These machine instructions might
be specific to the architecture of the machine on which you're running. Or it might be a virtual machine
like a JVM kind of code. In any case, these low level machine
instructions are the executable version of your program, and this is stored
in the file system on your disk. When your program starts executing, when it becomes a process,
the CPU loads instruction in batches. Or more simplified way,
it loads instructions one by one. It loads them into memory, and
then into cache, and then into registers. Typically the cache and the registers
contain the last few access instructions, so they follow what is known as
the least recently used principle. Now, as it executes each instruction,
the CPU, which is executing the process, loads the data that is necessary for
the instruction into the memory, and then is necessary into the cache and
the registers. And if there are any necessary changes
that happened to a variable like x, then these are stored first into cache and
then in to memory. Once in while you may need to
store something on disks so that you have a permanent storage. So in case the process goes offline
then you still have some data. Say, for instance, the program might open
a file and write something into the file. So in this case, you may want to write
those updates to the file onto the disk. Now of course,
this is a very highly simplified pictures. Computer architectures can be far
more complex than this today. But for our practical purposes,
in this course, and as far as explaining how
processes work, this will suffice. So next we move on to
a few mathematical topics. The first mathematical
topic is a Big O Notation. A Big O Notation is one of the most
basic ways of analyzing algorithms. When I give you an algorithm and I say
analyze the algorithm mathematically, essentially I expect you to come up
with at the least a big O notation analysis of that algorithm. The big O notation describes an upper
bound and the behavior of an algorithm. As some variable is scaled or increased
in value all the way till infinity. Typically, this variable
is the size of the input, maybe the number of input elements. You'll see a few examples of this. So essentially,
this big O analysis tells us how does the algorithm itself scale as
the size of the input is increased. This analyzes the run-time or typically
another performance metric as well. Most of the time, we analyze run-time. Sometimes, as you'll see in the course,
we'll analyze things like number of messages, even bandwidth that is
exchanged in the total network itself. The important thing about
big O notation is that it captures worst case performance, okay? So this is not expected performance or best case performance,
big O is worst case performance. Given this algorithm, what is
the worst that it can do in terms of this performance metric
that we're measuring? So essentially when I say
an algorithm A is O(foo), this means that algorithm A takes less
than c * times foo time to complete, assuming time is the metric
we're measuring, for a fixed constant c,
beyond some input size N, okay? Typically this foo that is present
in this definition is some function of the input size N. For instance,
I could say that an algorithm is order N, which means that algorithm A takes less
than c times N time to complete for some constant c beyond some input size N. Similarly the algorithm might be order N
squared which means that it is quadratic in time, and it takes time less than c
times N squared, for some constant c. Once again, when we say order N squared or order N, notice that we do not include
the constant c in the definition itself. This is because the consonant is
irrelevant, as long as there is a some fixed constant, that is good enough for
us as far as Big O notation is concerned. So we do not state the constants
in Big O notation. So let's see a couple of examples. So first, I give you an unsorted list of,
say, integers and I ask you to search for
the specific element in the list. This is actually means that you have
to iterate through the list one item at a time and search for the element by trying to match it with
each element already present in the list. What is the worst case performance? That's what we need for
the big O notation, right? So the worst case performance happens when
either the element is not there at all in the list, so you return a false or the
element is the very last one in the list, the very last one that
you matched against. Therefore, the worst case performance
involves N operations and the number of operations involved
is less than c times N, where c = 2 because the number of operations
is N where N is the size of the list. Okay, so the time as well as
the number of operations assuming each operation takes at one unit of time. Both the time taken for this algorithm, which iterates through the list as well as
the number of operations are both order N. That's why we say order N over here. Let's take a different example
to see how big O notation works. This deals with insertion
sorting of an unsorted list. So suppose I give you a list of elements,
let's say integers, and this is unsorted, and I ask you to sort them, say,
in increasing order of the elements. An insertion sort
algorithm works as follows, first, you create a new list that
is empty, then you iterate through the elements in the unsorted original
list, you remove one element at a time. And you insert the element in the new
list at the appropriate position. Essentially, you sort through
the new list linearly searching for the right position where
this element should be. So if you do this, the first element of
course takes one operation to insert, that's one insert operation. The second element in the worst case
takes two operations to insert, one operation for the comparison with
the one element that's all ready present in the new sorted list,
and one more operation to insert. Imagine the worst case where this second
element is inserted right at the very end of the list. Similarly, the third element will
take three operations to insert where the first two elements compare it with
the two already existing elements. And the third operation inserts
it at the very end of the list. If you go on like this and the i-th
limit takes i operations to insert and you can calculate that as
the total time required to insert all the N elements as 1 + 2 + 3,
so on till N. And this is a well-known sum which
comes to N (N + 1) divided by 2, which is less than 1 times N squared. So where the value of c equals 1,
this insertion sorting example is an algorithm that takes
order N squared in time, and also order N squared in
the number of operations. Next, we will look at a little
bit of basic probability. Before probability we need to
discuss a few definitions. The first definition is a set. A set is essentially
a collection of things. So, for instance,
a set S might be a set of all humans who live in this world at this current moment. A subset is another set which is
a connection of things that is a part of the larger set. So I might describe a set S2, which says the set of all humans
who live currently in Europe today. S2 is a subset of S because every element that is present in
S2 is also present in S. But the reverse is not necessarily true. Okay, so now probability,
any event has a probability of happening. So let me give you an example. If you wake up at a random hour of the day
Say you just wake up at some random hour of the day. Say you're jet lagged or something, and
I ask you what is the probability that the event at the time is between 10 AM and
11 AM? Let's try to calculate this. Well, there are 24 hours in a day, so you have a set that consists of
24 elements, one for each hour. 12 AM, 1 AM, 2 AM,
all the way through 10 AM, 11 AM, 11 PM. And so when I say an element like 1 AM,
I mean the hour between 1 AM and 1:59 AM. Similarly, 10 AM means 10 AM and 10:59 AM. Out of the set of 24 elements,
you pick one at random. And the probability that you're going to
pick 10 AM is essentially 1 divided by 24. Because you're picking one
element at random, and there are 24 elements in the set. And the probability that you pick
that one special element to 10 AM is 1 over 24 because you want to
be lucky to pick that 10, okay? So the probability that if you
wake up at random hour of the day the time is between 10 AM and 11 AM,
then that probability is 1 over 24. Now there are multiple events, and you
might need to calculate the probability of conjunctions or
disjunctions of these events. I'll describe what these are soon. So say E1 is one event, and
E2 is another event, and E1 and E2 are independent of each other. This means that E1 does not influence E2,
E2 does not influence E1. Then the probability that E1 and E2 both happen is essentially
the multiplication of these probabilities. So you take the probability of E1,
multiply it by the probability of E2, and that gives you the probability
that both E1 and E2 are true. Let's discuss an example of this. Suppose you have three shirts,
they're colored blue, green, and red. And also you wake up at a random hour and
blindly pick a shirt. You put your hand into your closet and
you blindly pick out a shirt. What is the probability that you
woke up between 10 AM and 11 AM, and that you picked a green shirt to wear? Well, the first probability of the first
event, that you woke up between 10 and 11 is essentially 1 over 24,
like we calculated on the previous slide. The probability that you picked the green
shirt is essentially one out of three because there are three colors of shirts,
you have three shirts. And you want to pick the green one. You want to be lucky to pick
the green one, so that's 1 over 3. And so the probability that
both these events are true, that you woke up between 10 and
11 and that you wore the green shirt, is the multiplication of
the probabilities of those events. So that's 1 over 24 times 1 over 3,
and that gives you 1 over 72. One of the things that you have to be
careful about here is that if E1 and E2 are not independent, meaning that
they influence each other in some way, then you cannot multiply
the probabilities with each other, okay? And so for instance, if the shirts that
you have in your closet change from one hour to another, because say someone
in your house changes them around. Then you can't necessarily multiply
these probabilities as they are here. A different thing that you may need to
do with two event probabilities is to order them. So if I give you two events E1 and E2, and I ask you the probability of either E1 or
E2 happening. Then you can say that the probability
of E1 or E2 is the probability of E1 plus the probability of E2 minus
the probability of E1 and E2. Okay, so
this is the intersection probability here. If you do not know probability of E1 and
E2, this last term over here, then you can write the inequality
probability of E1 or E2 is less than or equal to the sum of
the constituent probabilities. Sometimes we use these
inequalities to upper bound the probabilities of these
junctions as we see here. DNS refers to Domain Name System. It's essentially a name resolution system. It is run as a collection of
servers throughout the world and it helps you to translate URLs,
actually domain names, into IP addresses. So the input of the DNS is a domain name,
so just coursera.org. And this is a human readable string
that uniquely identifies the object. So we humans can easily remember
a name like coursera.org. Actually we really remember URLs
like class.coursea.org/foo. And when you enter this into your browser,
your browser extracts the domain name from this URL, and then sends this off
as a query to the DNS system. The DNS system then returns to you the IP
address of a web server that potentially hosts that content. And the IP address is, essentially,
a target, or an address, or an ID. And it is a unique string
that points to the object. The difference between an ID and a name,
the output and the input to a name resolution system like DNS is essentially
that IDs are harder to remember. It's harder for
us human beings to remember IP addresses. It's much easier for us to remember names. Also, IP addresses change but names don't. Now, the IP addresses might
refer to a actual web server, a unique web server that
actually hosts that content, so that now your client browser can send
a DCP and HTTP request to that server. Or it might refer to an indirect server or even a group of servers such as a content
distribution network, such as from Akami. The funny thing about names in your
system is that they can be changed. So the ID or the address
obtained from one name entered in your system can be given as name to
another name in your system, and that can return a different address,
and so on and so forth. And you can keep doing this until
you reach your final object itself. Graphs, so
when we say graphs in computer science, we don't necessarily mean
plots which have X and Y axis. A graph is essentially a network. So here I'm showing you a graph
of some cities, Amsterdam, Boston, Chicago, Delhi, and Edmonton. And the travel times between those cities
by air, rounded up to the nearest hour. Okay, so travelling from Amsterdam
to Boston takes about six hours. Travelling from Chicago to
Delhi takes about 14 hours. Say these are the flights that
are available on some particular airline, right? So you see both cities here as well as
connections between pairs of cities. And also some values
along those connections, which are the number of hours that it
takes to transit between those cities. These all have names in
the world of graphs. So each city would be a node or a vertex,
each connection between a pair of nodes will be called an edge, and the value
along an edge is called the edge weight. Also when I say that A is adjacent to B, this means that A has an edge
that connects it to B directly. Typically an edge goes between
two nodes or two vertices. An edge does not cross three nodes. So here, for instance, I have one,
two, three, four, five vertices. And how many edges do I have? I have an AE edge, an AB edge,
a BE edge, a BC edge, and a CD edge. So I also have five different edges,
each with its own edge weight. So in this lecture we have covered
the basic data structures such as a queue and a stack. We have seen that processes
are programs in action and that they consist of
multiple different pieces. Processes of course run on
a computer architecture. And it's important for you to know at
least a simplified version of the computer architecture so that you know what's
operating where when you run a process. We've seen some mathematical topics such
as O()notation, which analyzes the worst case performance of any given algorithm,
and then some basic probability. And finally,
we have seen a few miscellaneous topics. I hope you can keep coming back to this
as a reference whenever you need it throughout the course. [MUSIC]