[MUSIC] Hello, in this lecture series,
you will get to see what MapReduce is, the paradigm, what it is. And we'll look a little bit
into the internal details of how MapReduce scheduling works as well. We'll also see a few examples of how
Different applications can use MapReduce, and you'll get to see
a little bit of code as well. So in this first lecture here,
we look at the oral paradigm and I'll try to introduce you
to a very basic level. So the terms map and
reduce which comprise the portmanteau term MapReduce are borrowed from
functional languages such as Lisp. For instance here's how you would
calculate the sum of squares. Suppose we have in teacher say one,
two, three, four. And you want to calculate one square
plus two square plus three square plus four square. The map so first of all square
is a function which can be applied on any one of these integers,
one or two or three or four And at least to
the square of the corresponding digits. So square of 1 is 1, square of 2 is 4,
square of 3 is 9, and so on. So square takes its input 1 in teacher and
spews output 1 in teacher. Map essentially is a metafunction which
applies the function squared to a list of inputs. In this case 1, 2, 3, and 4 are in a list. This is using Function
language terminology. And the output of map square forward
by the list is also a list where the ith element of the list is a square
of the ith element of the input list. So map here essentially is a meta
function which processes each record. When I say record,
I mean integer over here. Sequentially in this particular case, but more importantly it
processes it independently. So the square of 1 can be calculated
independently from the square of 3 and
neither of them follows from the other. So that's the first part. The second part is an addition function
which takes as input again a list of the corresponding squares of
the integers and just sums them up. Reduce here is again a metafunction which
applies plus to a group of records, in this case the records
are just integers. And adds them up and the output in
this particular case is just 30. So once again, as far as we are concerned,
reduce is a metafunction that processes a set of records or a group
of records This may be all the record this may be a subset of all the records and
in group it processes it in batches. So that's a very gentle
introduction to how map and reduce work in the small scale. However if you're given a sample
application word count which happens to be one of the more
popular applications and widely used applications of map reduce And
you're given a huge data set, say, all of the text in Wikipedia or all
of the text in all of Shakespeare's works. And you're asked to produce a count for
every word that appears in that data set. So for instance the word Richard, which
appears in many of Shakespeare's works. How many times does it
appear across the entire and across the entirety of all of
the text in Shakespeare's works? You want to produce a con for that. Similarly you want to produce a con for every single word that appears
in that entire data set. How do you do this? Especially when you're dealing
with large amounts of data? The large amounts of words
the large numbers of words and the large amounts of Text that might
be contained in Shakespeare's works. Well that's where our MapReduce
paradigm comes into place. So the map as a task or as an entity processes individual records,
in this case the records are just words, each record is a word,
to generate intermediate key/value pairs. Okay, so here I have simpler file that
consist of four records or four words. Welcome everyone, hello everyone. And when MAP processes this, it produces the each of
the records one key value pair. So for instance the record Welcome
it produces a key value per Welcome comma one. This essentially means that the word
Welcome was encountered once. That's a key/value pair. Similarly, Everyone, the first Everyone,
generates a key/value pair of Everyone, 1. Hello generates Hello, 1. And everyone again, the second
occurrence indicates everyone comma one. This everyone comma one, the second one, is independent of the generation
of the first everyone comma one. So, once again, these records can be processed
completely independently of each other. In this particular case I
just have one Map Task, so it runs through these
records sequentially. But you can paralyze this
process fairly easily, especially when you have a large data set. You can parallelly process individual
records to generate intermediate key/value pairs and the output is going to be
the same as if you had just one map task. In this example, I have two map tasks. The blue one in the top processes
the first line of input, and produces two key value pairs for
each of the two records in its input. And the bottom green map task produces,
again, two key/value pairs for the two records that are in this input. So once again, output of this is
the same as that in the previous slide. If you have a very large dataset,
you can split up your input dataset. You can shard your input dataset or
split it up And have map tasks assigned to each shot or
each split and the corresponding output will be
the same as if you had one map task. And so you process a large number of
records by using multiple map tasks, and You can scale up the amount of
map tasks with the amount of data. In this particular case I've just shown, each map task's been assigned
just a couple of words. But of course, map tasks are assigned
much larger chunks of data, typically in several megabytes as you'll
see later on this lecture series. because in this particular case,
I have many map tasks processing a fairly large file, and producing output. And output is indistinguishable
from when we had just one map task. Why do we have parallel map tasks? Well, it helps speed up the process. So in the ideal case,
if you double the number of map tasks, the time to complete all the map tasks
will Go down by a factor of two. So you'll process your
input twice as fast. So that's the first step of word count,
but we still don't have a word count for each word. For instance, every one which appears
twice in this carpus still doesn't have a count two associated with it. That's where the reduce comes into play. So the reduce takes this input,
the output of the map Phase. So all the key value pairs that you
saw in our small example earlier are reproduced here. This is the output of the map phase, and that has given us input
to the reduce phase. The reduce processes and merges,
that's the important word here, all the intermediate key value pairs
associated on a per-key basis. So for instance, here it takes all the key
value pairs that have Everyone as the key. In this case,
there are two such key value pairs. And it sums up their values. In this case,
the value turns up to be two. Similarly, it does the same thing for all the key value pairs that
have Welcome as the key. In this case,
there's just one key value pair. And so that output is over here, Welcome
[INAUDIBLE] Similarly Hello comma 1, there's only one instance of it,
and that leads to Hello comma 1. And this is the final output
of the reduce phase, and this is the word count
that we were looking for. So the word Everyone that appears
twice is associated with a value of 2. That's over here. Well again,
how do you parallelize this reduce phase? The reduce phase is not Does not
process these records independently in other words the record everyone
comma one the second record here and the fourth record here need
to be processed together. Their values need to be summed up here. And so
this is not independent processing here. Instead what happens here is
the keys are being grouped. So you want all the key value
pairs with one given key. To appear at one reduce task, so
that their values can be merged together. So the way you do this is by
assigning keys to reducers. So you assign each key to one reduce,
you do this by partitioning the keys. So for instance, this example over here, the key everyone is assigned
to reduce task number one. And so all the key value pairs
that have key equals everyone will arrive at reduce task number 1,
which then will sum up the values for that given key and
produce the outboard Everyone comma 2. Similarly, the keys Welcome and Hello
are assigned to reduce task number 2, which receives those as inputs. For the key Hello, it just outputs Hello comma 1 because
that's the only key value pairs received. And for
the key Welcome it outputs Welcome coma 1. There are different ways of
partitioning keys across reduces. In this case the partitioning has assigned
everyone to reduce Task 1, and Hello and Welcome to reduce Task 2. One way of partitioning is
called hash partitioning. You take the key, you hash it by using
a consistent hash function, say, simple hash algorithm one one, or message
I've used five MD five, or just any other hash function, as long as it's the
same hash function applied to all keys. Then you take modular
the number of reduced servers, the number of servers that are assigned,
and that will give you the number of
reduced tasks, in this particular case. And than will give you the new server on
the reduced task number to which that reduces assign. Why do we use hashing? This leads to fail uniform load
balancing of keys across the reduced tasks in the system. Let's go get some code from Hadoop which
is the open source implementation if map produce. Map produce was of course implemented
by Google and they never. Open source the original implementation
but they wrote a paper on it and published it, and engineers from
Yahoo decided to write an open source implementation of MapReduce,
and that became Apache Hadoop. Apache Hadoop today is widely available
and widely used, as many of you know. A company called Hortonworks
has been spun off from Yahoo, which does a lot of the code
development for Hadoop. So here's what a map might
look like in Hadoop. You have a MapClass which
extends a well-known base and implements a well-known interface. It's a templatized interface for
those of you who are familiar with the Java language. And the main function here is the map. The map text inputs the key and
the value tells us an OutPut Collector. And in case you wanted
whole things into the user. Essentially what it does here is that
it takes the value which in this case is text. So the value might be one line
of text in the input file. And it tokenizes it into strings so here you have the line which is
consisting a collection of strings. Each string is a word. The StringTokenizer essentially
iterates through all the words. In this case they are tokens. And for each word, you output a key value pair which
is that word comma the value one. Okay, and here we have said
that one is the new IntWritable value over here and so that's output
as the intermediate key value pair. So for every word that You encounter in
the line, this map function takes us, produces output that were comma one
as intermediate key value pair. Now this line may not be a line, it may be, in fact be an entire
large block of text over here. And the map would work just fine So
what does a radius look like? Well, here you have the ReduceClass
again here, which has one reduced function and again, that has input
key which is Text over here. And values, because you may have multiple
values associated with a given key You have multiple values over here. This reduce function is called once for every key that is assigned
to that reduce task. So suppose that reduce task is assigned
ten keys, that reduce task is going to call this reduce function ten times, once
for each of the keys that is assigned to it, and the values, in that case, will
be all the values that it has received. From the intermediate key value pairs that
are associated with that particular key. So [INAUDIBLE] essentially, this call
of reduce will simply go through all the values and sum them up and produce as
output key-value pair where the key is the same as the input key and the value
is in fact the sum of the input values. And in fact,
this implementation is an implementation, a correct working implementation of
the work on example that we have seen. So this is,
as opposed to the previous slide, where we had shown the map function,
and the map function, for instance, might be called only
once by each map task, With all of the import given to that map
task as the input to that map function. Now, you also have some glue code such
as the driver which has a run function, specify the job name,
in this case it's mywordaccount. You say that your keys are all words
by setting your output key class. You also set the values are counts,
or integers, by setting the output value class. You set the mapper class and the reducer
class to the ones that we saw in the previous slides, and
then you set what the input path is, where you fetch the data from and
where do you write the data to. As you'll see soon in this lecture series,
essentially, Hadoop runs on top of a distributed file system and
that's where all the data is stored. The input path name and the output
path name are both names of files or directories in the underlying
distributive file system. And finally you tell the job to run. Not shown here is the partitioning
function which can also change in the system. If, for instance,
your data is not Easily hashable, or you want to do something like sort,
as you'll see soon, you may want to have a hand
tailored partitioning function, and you can change that,
too, in the Hadoop code. [MUSIC]