Hi there. In this, uh,
series of lectures, uh, we'll be discussing the distributed computing
problem known as multicast, which is very widely used
as a building block in, uh, many of the
cloud computing systems today. Uh, in this lecture today we'll be discussing the ordering
property of, uh, multicast. So multicast, again,
in a nutshell, uh, is a message
that needs to be sent out in a group of, uh, processes. Um, uh, these processes are
running at internet-based hosts. Uh, for instance, here I have
a group of processes, each denoted by a circle. A-a red circle, a red process,
has some piece of information that needs to be sent out
to all the other processes in that, uh, group. Uh, this is
only one multicast message. There might be multiple, uh,
multicast messages that are being sent out
by that sender one after another uh, and also multiple senders
in the group might be, uh, trying
to send multicast messages, uh, to the other processes
in the group. So, uh, multicast in a nutshell
is a message sent to a group of, uh, processes,
a selected group. A broadcast, on the other hand, is a message that is sent
to all the processes anywhere, uh, in the system and
in fact anywhere in the world. Broadcasts are also
very widely used, um, uh, but of course broadcasts can be pretty expensive, uh, because, uh, processes
that don't, uh, really, uh, have any interest
in the message might also receive
the multicast message or the broadcast message. A unicast message is, uh,
the most common kind of message that we have seen, uh,
so far in this course. Essentially it's
a point-to-point message; there is one sender process
and one receiver process. Uh, in terms of, uh, uh,
this terminology, the multicast has, uh, one sender and, uh,
multiple receivers per message. The broadcast has one sender and everyone else as a receiver
for that one message. So here in this lecture we'll
focus on, uh, multicasts only, which are messages sent out
to a group of processes. So who uses the multicast? It's a widely used
building block by many cloud computing systems. For instance, key value stores
like Cassandra, which are storage systems,
and database systems, use multicast internally. For instance, a given key might have multiple
replica servers which are replicating
the values for that key. So in that case, uh, the writes
and reads that are sent to that key from, uh, any client
will then be multicast inside the group so that all
the replicas are up to date and reflect the same values for the key
at any point of time. You don't want to send
the values for that key to other servers beyond
the replica group because they are not interested in that particular, uh, key itself. Also, these systems use
membership information, uh, such as, uh, gossip-style, uh, membership, uh, protocols
in these systems, and essentially,
uh, membership, uh, information requires information
about joins, leaves and failures of processes to be multicast out within a group of servers that are running
that storage system. Uh, multicasts are also used
in user facing scenarios, so for instance online
scoreboards of sporting events such as ESPN, French Open tennis the FIFA World Cup, essentially have each
of the clients, uh, be subscribed to certain topics, and essentially whenever there is an update for a topic, such as an update
to a score for a match, that update is multicast out
to all the clients, all the browsers out
there in the world that are interested
in this particular update. So that's a multicast being used
in a user, uh, facing scenario. Multicast is also used in the floor of, uh,
stock exchanges and air traffic control systems. For instance, on the floor
of a stock exchange, the group might be the set
of broker computers, and whenever there is a trade on any one of the broker computers, it's then sent out the other broker computers on the floor. This ensures all the broker
computers are up to date at all points of time and are
reflecting the latest updates and stock trades on the floor. Multicast is also used in
high-frequency trading among the servers that are trying to do
high-frequency trading, and here it's fairly important
for the multicasts to be fast, uh, as well as reliable as well. In the air traffic
control system, all the air traffic controllers are seeing a picture of the sky, and you want
all the, hm, pictures to be consistent
with each other. You don't want one
air traffic controller, uh, seeing a slightly stale
or outdated picture, and so any update done by one air traffic controller's
computer is then multicast out to the group of other air
traffic controllers' computers. So you see two things, eh,
emerging from here. One is you need
reliable multicast; you want all the processes in the group
to receive the multicast. And the second one is you need
to worry about ordering; you want, uh, all the multicasts
to be received, uh, in the same somewhat consistent order at all the processes
in the group. So let's look
at the FIFO ordering first. Uh, in FIFO ordering, essentially multicasts
from each sender are received in, uh, the
same order that they are sent at all receivers. This means that
if two multicasts are sent by, uh, these same sender,
they're of course sent in an order depending
on that senders um, uh, timeline and the sender's clock, and they need to be
delivered in exactly that order at all the receivers
in the group. However, if two multicasts are
from different senders, then we don't really care about which order
they're delivered in. Uh, some multicasts, uh, some
processes might deliver those two multicasts from
different senders in one order, and, uh, other receivers
might deliver them in the opposite order, and that's fine as far
as FIFO ordering is concerned. So a little bit more formally,
if a correct process, uh, issues or sends
a-a multicast, uh, m to a group g, uh, and then sends a multicast m' to the same group g, then every correct process
that delivers, uh, the second message m'
would already have delivered m. In other words, you are saying
that, um, you deliver m' only after you have delivered m. And notice that here we're
talking about correct processes, which means that we're talking
about, uh, non-faulty processes. This accounts for, uh,
failures, if processes fail, then we don't necessarily know
what they did, and so we don't want
to worry about them. We a, uh, we only want
to make sure that processes
that have not failed, uh, follow, uh, the particular, uh, ordering guarantee that we are trying to provide. So as an example,
here is a timeline. Again, here we have four
processes; P1, P2, P3, P4. Time runs from left to right, and you notice that
there are multiple multicasts being sent out, so process P1 sends out multicast, uh, 1 over here,
shown as, uh, M1:1. Process P1 also sends out
a second multicast, M1:2. Uh, process P3 sends out
a multicast M3:1. And so you'll notice here
that because M1:1 and M1:2 are multicasts sent
by processes-process P1, which is the sender,
in that order, they need to be delivered
in exactly that order at all the recipient processes. So P2 delivers M1:1 first, uh, and only then
does it deliver M1:2. Similarly,
P3 delivers M1:1 first, and only then
does it deliver M1:2. Similarly for P4 as well. However, as far as M1:2,
sent by process P1 and M3:1 sent by process P3
are concerned, they are sent
by different senders, so FIFO doesn't
worry about them. In fact, they can be delivered
in opposite orders at, uh, different, uh, process. So P2, for instance,
delivers M3:1 first, while P4 delivers M1:2 first, and that's fine. This still obeys FIFO ordering because we are only bothered about, uh, the messages that originate
from the same sender. Here, if, uh, P3 had sent
a second message M3:2, say over here, then that should have been
delivered, uh, after M3:1 at all the recipient processes. So let's look
at the next flavor, which is known
as causal ordering. Uh, this is an extension
of, uh, FIFO ordering. Uh, in this,
um, kind of ordering, multicasts whose send events
are causally related must be received in
the same causality-obeying order at all receivers. What this is trying to tell you
is that if two multicast sends are, uh, related
in the-by a causal path, so if the multicast send
of one message m, uh, causally
happened before the multicast, uh, uh, the send of
the multicast mech-message m', uh, then m must be delivered
before m' at all receivers. If two message sends, m and m', are not causally related, meaning that their send events
do not have a causal path between them, then, well,
all bets are off, and, uh, it's not
necessarily required that their multicasts
be delivered in the same order. They can in fact be flipped
at different processes. Formally, uh, if a multicast
message m is sent to a group g, and the multicast send event
causally happens before, this is Lamport's happens-before relationship over here, shown by the horizontal arrow, if that causally happens before
the multicast send event of another message m',
a multicast message m', then any correct process
that delivers m' would already
have delivered m. In other words,
you deliver m first, and only then
can you deliver m'. So let's look at an example
again with our timeline of four processes P1 through P4. This is a slightly different set
of multicast messages from the earlier example
you saw. Here, process P1 sends out
a multicast message M1:1, uh, which is received by process
P2 along with other receivers, but then subsequently P2 sends
out a multicast message M2:1. Now, because the multicast
message M1:1 was received by P2 before it sent out
its multicast message M2:1, the send event of M1:1 happens before the send event of M2:1, and so we want those two multicasts to be received in the same order
at all the other processes in, uh, the system. Similarly, M1:1 is received
by P3 before P3 sends outs it- sends out
its first multicast M3:1, and so M1:1 happens before M3:1, and we wanna make sure that those two messages
are delivered in that causality-obeying
order at all the recipients. Of course, M3:1 happens
before M3:2 because, uh, causality implo-implies FIFO ordering, and so these messages M3:1
and M3:2 are also delivered in that same order
at all receivers, okay? So that-that obeys
FIFO ordering, and since M1:1
happens before M3:1, and transitively
M1:1 happens before M3:2, we want the delivery order
to be, uh, obeying that ordering which is M1:1 first,
then M3:1, and then M3:2. You can verify for yourself
that this ordering is in fact, uh, obeyed
by-at all the processes in this example. Now let's look at two messages
here: M2:1 sent by process P2, and M3:1 sent by process P3. There is no causal path in
between these two send events, so these two send events are
in fact, uh, concurrent events, and so their delivery, uh,
may be in different orders at different processes. So for instance, P1 delivers
M2:1 first, while P4 delivers M3:1 first, and only then M2:1. And this is fine; this obeys
causal-causal ordering, because concurrent send events
may be ordered in any, uh, order at different recipients. The only thing that you're
trying to guarantee here is that if two send events
are causally related, then they are in fact delivered in the causality-obeying-
obeying order at all recipients. So let's compare a little bit,
uh, the causal ordering that we just saw with the FIFO
ordering which we saw before. Causal ordering that is satisfied by multicast protocol implies that
that multicast protocol also satisfies FIFO ordering. Why is this true? Well, um, consider
a multicast protocol that satisfies causal ordering. If two multicasts,
M and M' are sent by the same-same
sender process P, and M was sent before M',
then, um, it's true that M happened before M',
because time progresses only linearly at, uh,
the sender process, uh, P, and so because
the multicast protocol already satisfies
causal ordering, it must be true that M
is delivered first, and only then is M' delivered. Okay, this means
that a multicast protocol that implements causal ordering will automatically obey
FIFO ordering. However, the reverse
is not true. If I give you
a multicast protocol that obeys FIFO ordering, it may not obey
causal ordering, because FIFO ordering
does not worry about, uh, multicast sends, uh-uh,
from different, uh, processes, even if they
are causally related. Why prefer causal
ordering at all? Uh, well, causal ordering
is pretty intuitive, and therefore it is actually used in several, uh,
scenarios, uh, whether multicast or not. For instance, you might have
a group of, uh, friends on a social network, one of the more popular social networks, choose your own. Uh, if a friend
sees your message m, say you post a message m, uh, and, uh, your friend then
posts a response, uh, comment m' to it, you want your other friends
to be seeing m, uh, before they see m'. If they see m' first
before they see m, then the comment doesn't necessarily make sense to them, because it is a-it is
in the context of the message m. Uh, so, uh, before-because m
happens before m', you want their delivery orders
at the other, uh, processes in the group-which in this case
are your other friends, uh, or rather
your common friends between you and
the posting other friend, uh, to see, um, m
first and only then m'. However, if, uh, two friends,
uh, post m" and n" concurrently, and these are
concurrent send events, then they can be seen
in any order, and that's still fine. A variety of systems implement, uh, this kind
of causal ordering. This includes social networks,
uh, bulletin boards, uh, including, uh, news groups
and, um, uh, posts on the news servers, uh, and comments on websites,
and so on and so forth. Finally we come
to our third flavor of ordering, which is total ordering. Total ordering is sometimes
called as atomic, uh, broadcast. Unlike FIFO and causal ordering, uh, the definition
of this total ordering doesn't necessarily pay
any attention to the order in which
multicasts are sent. What it is into-instead
trying to guarantee is that all the receivers receive all the
multicasts in the same order. Uh, notice that I'm not saying
anything about the order in which they are sent. All I am saying is
that if a correct process P delivers the message m- multicast message m, before another multicast
message m', independent of what
the senders did, then any other correct process in the system P', uh, that delivers m'
would already have delivered m. In other words, what we are
saying is that if any process, uh, delivers message m
before m', then every other correct
process in the group will also be, uh, delivering
message m before, uh, m'. So here is an example
of, uh, total ordering. Again, this is, uh,
the same example from before. Here, uh, we wanna make sure
that all the multicasts, uh, sent here, the four multicasts that are
sent in this particular run, are delivered in the same
order at all the processes. So for instance, at P1,
M1:1 is delivered first, then M2:1 is delivered, then M3:1 is delivered, and then M3:2 is delivered. Now we we need to make sure
that all the other processes deliver these four multicast
in exactly that order, so M1:1 first, then M2:1,
then M3:1, and then M3:2. Let's look at P2. P2 delivers M1:1 first, then
M2:1, then M3:1, and then M3:2. So far so good. Then, uh, P3 delivers
M1:1 first, then it needs to deliver M2:1, but, uh, M2:1
has not yet been received when M3:1 is being sent out, so the, uh, delivery
of M3:1 at P3 itself needs to wait until M2:1
is delivered, and then M3:1
can be delivered, and finally M3:2 is delivered. This delivery order at P3
obeys, uh, the total ordering. Finally, at P4,
M1:1 is delivered first, then M2:1 is delivered, then M3:1,
and finally M3:2 is delivered, and this satisfies
total ordering because all the other processes, ah, in-all the processes
in the group deliver their multicasts, ah, deliver all the
multicasts in the same order, uh, as all the other
processes in the group. Now this of course means just
that some processes like P3 may need to d-delay the delivery
of, uh, the multicast messages, perhaps even
at the sending process of that particular multicast. Okay, so those are
the three flavors we have seen. Uh, those are not the only
three flavors possible. Um, since FIFO and
causal ordering, uh, uh, look at this, uh,
the sending order, and total ordering looks
at the receiving order, they are orthogonal, and so we have the possibility
of hybrid protocols. You could have a FIFO total
hybrid, uh, protocol for multicast ordering, which satisfies both FIFO
ordering and total ordering. In other words, this protocol
would give you a total order for multicast messages
that obeys the, uh, FIFO ordering ordering
of multicast sends. A causal-total hybrid protocol
is also possible for multicast ordering, which obeys both, uh, causal
as well as total ordering. This means that you have
a total ordering of, uh, multicast messages which, uh, also obeys
the, uh, causality. Notice that causal-total
ordering would mean, uh, that um, even concurrent events, um, concurrent multicast sends, are in fact ordered the same way at all the processes
in the group, uh, but because
they are concurrent, we don't really care
which order it is. Any order is fine
as long as it's consistent. Uh, multicast sends that are
causally related are of course, uh, delivered
in the causality-obeying order at all the processes
in the group. Uh, so we have discussed
so far what the ordering mean, what the flavors are. Uh, in the next lecture
we'll discuss how to im- how to implement each
of these, uh, orderings.