So in the previous, uh, lectures we have seen, uh
eventual consistency which is what, uh, Apache
cas-Cassandra supports, uh, but that's not the only kind of, uh, weak consistency model
that can be supported. In fact, there is a spectrum
of consistency models ranging from, uh, weak eventual all the way
to strong consistency models such as sequential
consistency models. As you move from left
to right on the spectrum, you get stronger and stronger
consistency models and you get slightly slower, uh, reads and writes, especially when
you have, uh, partitions. So essentially,
if you really care, uh, or your application really cares about fast availability of reads and writes, uh,
for your data, you wanna move to the left side of the spectrum. But if you care more
for consistency of your data, uh, then you wanna move toward
the right side of the spectrum. So Cassandra offers, uh, the eventual
consistency, uh, uh, model which says that if writes
to a key stop, then all replicas of that key will, uh, converge eventually. Uh, typically they converge
the latest written value, uh, or the last writer wins policy
is used, which is LWW. Uh, this is taken from, uh, Amazon's Dynamo system
or Amazon's DynamoDB. Uh, and Cassandra was inspired
by the DynamoDB system. LinkedIn's Voldemort
key-value store also, uh, was, uh,
inspired by DynamoDB, and it shares,
uh, the same, uh, feature. But a lot of, uh, work has
been done in the last few years where, uh, um, systems have
developed that strive towards, uh, stronger and stronger
notions of consistency. Stronger than eventual, uh, while always trying
to, uh, maintain, high availability, uh,
and partition-tolerance, which is what is guaranteed
by systems like, uh, Cassandra. Uh, these include
a variety of models ranging from Per-key
sequential models, uh, to, um, uh, CRDTs, uh,
to, uh, Causal models to Probabilistic models
to Red-Blue consistency models, uh, and also
Strong models, of course. We'll discuss some
of these over, uh, this lecture. So Per-key sequential
essentially says that on a per-key basis, all operations
have a global order. So, uh, you could ensure this
by maintaining, uh, a per-key coordinator, and ensuring
that all the reads and writes are serialized
through the coordinator, uh, and, uh, therefore they have
a single global order. This, of course, may be, um, uh, restrictive because
if that coordinator fails and you need
free like another coordinator, uh, however, it, uh,
does guarantee some stronger notion
of consistency. CRDTs are a new, uh, replicated,
uh, data structure known as Commutative
Replicated Data Types. Uh, um, and these data
structures, um, uh, commuting-or commutating writes
give the same result. Essentially, commutating writes
means that if you reverse the order of two writes,
then the end result is the same. For instance,
if your data structure which is an integer, and the only operation
allowed on the data, uh, in there is a +1, essentially this is
what is known as a counter, uh, a counter is
a commutative data type. If you have two writes coming
in from two different clients, each of those writes is essentially a +1 operation. If client one's
operation goes first and then client two's operation is applied, you get the same result,
which is a +2, as if you applied client
two's operation first and then client one's operation, you'll again get a +2. So commutating those two writes
results in the same end result. Essentially if you have, uh,
if you have a CRDT the servers really
do not need to worry about, uh, ordering the writes with respect to each other; all the writes have,
uh, the, um, have, uh, have the same effect. Or rather, all the writes can be
commutated with each other and, uh, the end result of any permutation of these writes is the same
as any other permutation. The notion of CRDTs was discovered
by researchers in INRIA, and it has been extended
to not just counters, uh, which are the simplest,
uh, notion, uh, but also other complicated
data structures such as, uh, documents, um, which are shared and are being written and read
by multiple users at the same time. Um, so related to the CRDTs is the notion
of red-blue consistency. Uh, it's not always possible
to write operations, um, which, uh, or transactions, uh, on the clients' side which only have commutated, um, uh, uh,
the commutative property. There are some operations
that absolutely need, uh, and require to be ordered, uh, at all the data centers, uh, in the same order. So the red notion
of red-blue consistency from the Max Planck Institute
in Germany essentially, uh, uh, writes client operations, uh,
in, uh, in such a way that the operations are split into either red operations, ah, or blue operations. So each operation is
either red or blue. The blue operations
are commutative, so they can be executed
in any order, uh, with respect to each other
across data centers. But the red operations
absolutely need to be executed in the same order
across all data centers. And this way, you can, uh, by rewriting the original
client transactions, uh, into, uh, red
and blue operations, you can support a stronger
notion of consistency, um, uh, while still supporting some notions of availability. One of the newer notions
of consistency that has emerged, uh, from researchers
in Princeton and Carnegie-Mellon is the notion
of causal consistency. Uh, let's look
at an example here, um, so, uh, I have three clients here, clients A, B, and C. Client, uh, A, does a W(K1, 33). Subsequently, Client B
does a R(k1) which returns this value of 33. And this means that this, uh,
read, uh, is causally, uh, dependent on the, uh,
write from Client A. So there is a causal rink-link
in between, uh, this write to this read. Uh, this doesn't effect the messages that flow
between Client A and B, in fact, Client A and B
may not communicate with each other at all directly. However, because the read
returns the same value as the write, there is a causality that flows
from the write to the read. Of course there is causality
at that client that says so after the R(K1) by the client, uh, W(K2), uh, W(K2, 55) is done by the same client so this read happens
before this particular write, causally speaking. And then later on, if another
Client C does a R(K2) and returns 55, then there is of course
a causality from the write by Client B, uh,
to that read by Client C. Subsequently if, uh,
the Client C does a R(K1), K1, the first key, over here, this must return 33 because, uh, the W(K1)
is causally related to this. 'Cuz essentially there
is a causal path going from W(k1, 33) to R(K1)
at Client B to R-to W(K2) at Client B to R(K2) at Client C to R(K1)at Client C. This is the causal path, and this means that the write of, uh, (K1, 33) happened before
this key, uh, this, uh, R(K1) and so this key-
uh, uh, this read must return, uh, the, uh, value of 33 and not an older value
such as, uh, 22, which may have been written
by a client previously. Okay, so this is causality, and essentially causal
consistency says that reads obey causality and they return the, uh, latest causally written value, uh, by, uh, any, uh, client. However, there might be multiple
causally written values as you see elsewhere
in this course, uh, and so, uh, the causal consistency allows a read to return one
of potentially many different, um, uh, written, uh, values and so it's not as strong
as the strongest notion of consistency
but it's quite close. So what are these strong
consistency models that I keep talking about? Well, there are, uh,
tw-at least two, uh, major, uh, strong consistency models. There are linearizability
and sequential consistency. Linearizability is one
of the strongest notions of consistency, uh, which says that each
operation by a client is visible or is available instantaneously, and when I say instantaneously
I mean in real time to all the other clients. This is as if
there were only one copy of every key value pair, and they were being stored
on exactly one, uh, server. So this is one
of the strongest notions of- notions of consistency
and however it's very, um, uh, difficult to support in, uh,
distributed systems. Uh, sequential consistency's
also a strong notion of consistency, but it's not
as strong as linearizability. Sequential consistency was
originally, uh, stated by Lamport as follows, says: Essentially, this is
an after-the-fact way of, uh, reordering
the operations that, uh, that occurred
so that there is still sanity in this new ordering, uh, and the sanity also obeys
the order at each client. Okay, so, essentially
this reordering, uh, obeys, uh, uh,
things like causality, it obeys, um, uh, uh, clients being able to read
their own writes, and it also obeys, uh,
the, um, uh, ordering- the linear ordering
at each client itself. The sequential ordering
that you come up with may not be same
as the linearized, uh, ordering. It may be slightly different,
but it still makes sense. Okay, so, um, uh,
a transaction ACID properties, um, uh, um, are being supported, uh, by some of the newer
generations of NoSQL systems, these are sometimes
called as NewSQL systems. These include academic systems
such as Hyperdex from Cornell, uh, also, uh, Spanner,
uh, from Google supports transactions and, uh, stronger notions of consistency, and also other systems, uh, which support
transaction chains such as from Microsoft Research.