Welcome. So, uh, in this series of
lectures we are going to study, uh, peer-to-peer systems, or
what are known as P2P systems. Peer-to-peer systems
started emerging in the, uh, late 1990s, early 2000s. Uh, they started with a variety of very popular peer-to-peer systems such as, Napster and Gnutella, and soon there was a lot
of academic research, uh, that was leading to, uh, peer-to-peer systems being developed, uh, as well. So we'll study
both these classes of peer-to-peer, uh, systems. Why do we want to study
peer-to-peer systems? Well first, uh, these are, uh,
distributed systems that, uh, were really the first very
large-scale distributed systems. Uh, peer-to-peer systems like
Napster and Gnutella had, uh, millions, tens of millions, in
some cases hundreds of millions of clients communicating with
each other at the same time, in the same system. And so when we want to study
scalable distributed systems, uh, this is a great, uh,
area for a case study. Uh, also, the ideas and techniques from the, uh, era of peer-to-peer systems have been leveraged and are used quite a bit
in cloud computing systems. Uh, later on, uh, we'll study
key-value stores, such as Cassandra, Riak, uh,
Voldemort from LinkedIn, and also DynamoDB
from, uh, Amazon. All of these, for instance,
use techniques, such as, consistent hashing, which we'll study in the Chord, uh, peer-to-peer system, uh, in this lecture series. So here is what, um, the, um,
user interface might look like for a peer-to-peer system. This is a snapshot of the
Napster user interface beta 7. Essentially,
what you do is, that you, uh, you, uh, type in key words, in this case the key word
is actually the file name, but you might be able to type
in other key words too, such as the artist's name,
the song name, the album name, and you hit enter, or you hit "Find It" in this case, uh, and then once you do that, uh, the system goes off and it, uh, retrieves
a series of locations, of potential locations,
for this file, and then you, uh, essentially, uh, click on the f- on the location that seems
to yield the fastest, uh, connection, this-uh,
the fastest download speed, and voila,
the file starts downloading. So our interest as distributed
systems designers, as cloud computing designers, is to see what goes on underneath the hood from the time
that you hit "Find It" until the results come back, and then after you click,
um, "Download" on one of the entries, what happens underneath? What are the messages exchanged
underneath among the clients and the servers in the system? That's what we want to do here;
that's what we want to study in this particular
lecture series. So a little bit of history
before we get started into the, um, uh, internals of Napster. Napster was founded in 1999
by Shawn Fanning, who was then a freshman
at Northeastern University, and, uh, Napster
was just a nickname that they used to call him. His roommate-roommates used
to call him Napster because he used to, um, uh, apparently, uh,
he loved to take naps, uh, and, uh, so he named
his system Napster and, um, uh, overnight Napster became very very popular, and users started using Napster to download MP3s and MPEGs, which unfortunately, uh, were covered by copyright. Copyright essentially means that the recording label that
is producing a song by an artist owns the copyright, and you cannot, uh, exchange, uh, that song for free without paying the recording label, and therefore
the artist as well. The same goes
for movies as well and the movie
production companies. So the Recording Industry
Association of America, uh, a group of recording labels, sued Napster and asked for
an exorbitant amount of money per download. Uh, subsequently, Napster,
uh, was, uh, uh, ruled by the US Federal Appeals Court as violating, uh, uh, copyright laws,
or rather, not as violating copyright laws, but helping users, uh,
violate copyright laws. So Napster, as you will see
from the design, was not directly infringing copyright laws, but was indirectly helping users to infringe copyright laws. At the same time Napster
continued to grow popular, there was a study in 2000
that showed that, uh, uh, all the traffic out of University of Wisconsin Madison, uh, 25% of that traffic was,
uh, Napster traffic. Many universities
subsequently banned it because it was hogging
the bandwidth, uh, in their, uh, networks. Napster reopened, uh, later
on, uh, as a paid service. Today it still runs
as a paid service. Essentially, you pay some amount
of money to download a song, and some of that payment
goes to the song-writers and the music labels as well. Napster is, uh,
is an open protocol, and people are free to develop Napster clients and servers, um, uh, today, and you can find more at the, uh, SourceForge page
for Napster. Another study, uh,
system we'll study, Gnutella, uh, also, um, uh,
used to be an open protocol, and recently
it's been replicated, um, and so we'll study that
as well in the next lecture. So what we'll study is, uh, a variety of widely pe-deployed peer-to-peer systems, uh, Napster, Gnutella, uh, Fasttrack, uh, uh, BitTorrent. Um, fasttrack is
the underlying system for Kazaa, Kazaalite and Grokster. Uh, and also we'll study
peer-to-peer systems that came out of academia, uh, systems like Chord,
uh, Pastry and, uh, Kelips. Once again, these are only
the tip of the iceberg. There are many other systems
that came out of academia. We are not going to be able
to cover all of those hundreds of
peer-to-peer systems, uh, but just representative ones, uh, from particular categories.