In this lecture, we will see,
uh, how close, uh, the failure detectors we have discussed come to the optimal, and in fact what the optimal is. So what does optimal mean? Optimal is derived
from the main properties, the correctness properties: completeness and accuracy, as well as, uh,
the time projection, known as speed, and the scale. Essentially, we wanna
guarantee completeness always. We will denote, uh, the time
projection as T time units, and we'll denote
the accuracy as, um, or rather,
the inaccuracy as PM(T) which is basically a probability
of mistake in time T. Essentially this says that, uh,
this is the probability that a mistaken detection will be
made in, uh, T time units. Given these requirements,
we will then compare the, uh, message load across
all the protocols, and that becomes the, uh, base for comparison across protocols. So let's do this, uh, comparison
for all-to-all heartbeating. Uh, you'll notice, uh,
that essentially, uh, T is the time-out period
or the, um, direction time. Uh, the-the period at which
heartbeats are sent out, uh, typically the time-out period
is, uh, a constant, uh, times, uh, the, uh, period at which
heartbeats are sent out, and so the load essentially is,
uh, N heartbeats sent out every T time units
per process pi. So the load per process
is linear in N, uh, for the all-to-all
heartbeating approach. For, uh, the, uh,
gossip-based approach, uh, this slide should, uh, the time
should be gossip based approach, you have, uh, T equals, um, a log(N) times
some constant times tg. tg is the gossip period, the period at which
gossips are sent out to all the other
members in the group. We're assuming here, uh, th-of
course that the gossip message contains the entire
membership list. So essentially the load on, uh,
each member per gossip period is O(N) because it sends out
N entries from its membership list, so the load is N/tg. But tg we can obtain from
the earlier equation, which essentially says
that gossip takes order log(N) rounds
to propagate, and if you plug it in,
you see that L is N log(N)/T. You'll notice here automatically that the gossip-based heartbeating protocol here has a higher load
than the all-to-all heartbeating we discussed
in the previous slide. That's natural because gossip
is trying to get a slightly better accuracy
by using more messages. So how close are
these to the optimal? What is the optimal? Well, you can, uh, show
that if, um, uh, you're given the values
of T, PM(T), and N, as well as a, uh, probability
of losing a message, called pml, this is an independent message
loss probability applied on every single message
independently of other messages, then, uh, you
need to send out at least
log(PM(T))/log(pml) messages, uh, outside
from every single process so that that is a, uh,
probability that, um, at least one message makes it
across to, uh, the other side, meaning to the other N-1
processes in the system. Essentially, you can show that
the worst case load has to be at least this value, log(PM(T))/log(pml)*1/T, uh, for you to satisfy
the PM(T) requirement. You'll notice that here
this value of L*, the worst case load, is in fact, uh, not dependent on N at all, so it is, uh, scale independent
or scale free. So the all-to-all and
gossip-based heartbeating are in fact suboptimal because they have, uh, at least, um, an O(N),
um, uh, requirement. In fact they are O(N) log(N) for
the gossip-based heartbeating. The, uh, key here is to realize
that these two protocols mix up the failure detection and
the dissemination components. Essentially they are trying
to have all the processes in the system detect
the failure by themselves and not really
using dissemination, uh, component, uh, separately. So the key to getting
closer to this bond is to separate
the two components and to use a failure
detection, uh, component that is not based on heartbeats, in fact is based on the inverse, uh, c-, uh, um, uh, an approach that a lot of you
will be familiar with. We'll discuss that
in the next lecture.