In this lecture, we'll be looking at one of the standards for synchronizing clocks
in the internet. The standard is called NTP. NTP stands
for Network Time Protocol. Uh, here the NTP servers,
which are managed, are organized
in a tree structure. Uh, I'm showing the tree
structure here with, uh, the root of the tree
or the primary server, uh, being shown here. That's the one, uh, that
has a UDC time added. There are secondary servers
that are, uh, the children of the primary, uh, server. And, uh, that
synchronize directly with the primary server. Then there are tertiary servers
which synchronize with their corresponding parent, uh, at the secondary
server level. Your client might be
one of the work statio- might be one of the leaves
in this, uh, tree, and I'm showing one
particular client over here. So essentially, each node
in the tree here synchronizes with its parent in the tree. How does it synchronize? Well here is how
the NTP protocol works and then we'll look
at how it sets the clock over the next few slides. So a child, uh, sends a message
to the parent saying, "Hey, let's start the protocol,
I wanna synchronize my clock." The message, uh, uh, uh,
sent by the parent in response is called message 1. Uh, the parent 1 respon-uh, records the time
at which it sends the message. This time is ts1 over here, and then the child
when it receives the message 1, it records
its receive time as tr1. Notice that these times are set
according to the local clocks at the corresponding processes. So ts1 is according
to the parent's local clock and tr1 is according
to the child's local clock, which of course
are not synchronized. Uh, the child then sends back
a response message, message 2. Records its sent time as ts2,
according to its own clock. And when the parent receives
a response, it, uh, marks, uh, the response received time as tr2 according
to its own clock. Finally, the parent sends
over the values of, uh, ts1 and tr2 to child, uh, and then the child
uses all these four values: ts1, tr1, ts2, and tr2
to set its clock. How does it set its clock? Let's, uh, look at it. So why is this particular offset
used by the child to set its clock? Why this particular
funky equation? So let's calculate
the actual error, uh, uh, due to this particular protocol. Suppose the real offset,
the real clock offset between the child
and the parent is, uh, oreal. We don't know what oreal
is, but let's say its oreal. This means that the child
is ahead of the parent by oreal and the parent is ahead
of the child by -oreal, or it's behind
the child by oreal. Now, the value of oreal
might actually be negative over here, right? So, uh, these two statements would still be true
in this case. Uh, suppose the one-way
latency of message 1 is L1, and similarly, the one-way
latency for message 2 is L2. We don't know the values
for L1 and L2, just because the clocks
are not synchronized, and this means that it's gonna
be, uh, hard, if not impossible, to measure the one-way
transmission latency. However, we can write down
the equations based on these variables. So the receive time
of message 1, tr1 equals the transmit si-uh,
the send time of the message 1 plus its, um, uh, uh, latency, uh, uh, message delay plus
the clock offset, oreal. Similarly, the receive time
of message 2 is, uh, equal to its send time plus
the message latency L2 minus, uh, the clock delay, because th-this message is going in the opposite direction as message 1. So, using
these two equations now, you can subtract the second equation from the first and this gives you, uh,
this equation for oreal. You can solve, uh,
for, uh, for oreal. Uh, and oreal turns out to be
this particular, uh, equation over when you massage the terms. And, uh, this first term
is in fact the same as, uh, the value of o
that you see up here at the title, uh,
part of this slide. And this means
that the second part in fact now becomes the error because now, uh, the
difference between oreal and o is bounded by, uh, (L2-L1)/2, and this is of course less than the |(L2+L1)/2|, and this is in fact
the round-trip time. So this means that the error, uh, in, uh, this particular algorithm, NTP algorithm, is bounded
by the round-trip time, um, uh, or at least half
of the round trip time in this particular case. Okay, so this is justification
for actually using this particular value o
to set, uh, the clock. However, we still
have a non-zero error. We just can't seem
to get rid of this error; it always seems to depend
on the round-trip time. Uh, whenever you have a non-zero
round-trip time it seems like, uh, the error is about half
of the round trip time. So the question arises, um, uh,
since it's getting so hard to synchronize clocks, why can't we just
not synchronize clocks and instead go directly
to the root of the problem, which is that we want
to assign time stamps to, uh, uh, uh, the, uh,
events that happen in a distributed system and do this without synchronizing clocks? We'll see how to do this
in the next lecture.