[MUSIC] In this lecture we continue discussion
of the Chandy-Lamport Global Snapshots algorithm, and
see why it was causally correct. So we discuss this notion
known as consistent cuts. Before we discuss consistent cuts,
let's discuss a cut. A cut is a time frontier at each process
and at each channel in the system. So essentially at each process and at each
channel, you decide a time point, and everything to the left of that
time point on that process or channel is considered to be in the cut. And anything to the right of that time
point is considered to be out of the cut. So, that is a cut. Some cuts are consistent, and in order for a cut to be consistent you need to make
sure that every pair of events, e and f, that occurred in the system at any
processes, they need not be at the same process, such that e is in
the cut and f happened before e, if these two conditions are true then it
is also true that f is also in the cut. Okay, if this is true then
the cut obeys causality and is said to be a consistent cut. So let's see two examples of cuts. The green cut on the left is a consistent
cut because it obeys the two conditions. Notice here, the messages over here,
B happened before E, and E is in the cut and
so B is also in the cut. H happened before F, F is out of the cut,
H is in the cut, and that's okay. So in this particular cut, the message
H to F is set to be in transit and is captured by the cut
itself as being in transit. The red cut on the other hand, shown
in the right, is not a consistent cut, because consider this message that has
a send event G and the receive event D. D is in the cut, but G which
happened before D is out of the cut. And that is not allowed by
the consistency predicated, so this red line I've drawn out here is
a cut, but it is not a consistent cut. So our Global Snapshot algorithm which you
saw in the last lecture, calculated this particular snapshot over here which
consists of each of the process states, S1, S2, S3, and the states for
each of the channels C, I, J, which are six channels in the system. So our Global Snapshot algorithm
in fact results in a snapshot that is causally correct in the sense that
it corresponds to a consistent cut. By the green dotted line here I am showing
the consistent cut that is captured by our Global Snapshot algorithm. You'll notice that the place where
the cut cuts across each process timeline is in fact the time at which
that process state is calculated, S1 for P1, S2 for P2 and S3 for P3. And also this consistent cut cuts
across the message G to D which is also a part of the Global Snapshot calculated
by the Chandy-Lamport algorithm. So the consistent cut shown by
this green dotted line is in fact the same as the state captured by
the Global Snapshot algorithm. In fact,
you can show that in any invested system, any run of the Chandy-Lamport
Global Snapshot algorithm always results in a global snapshot
that corresponds to a consistent cut. Let's see why this is true. Let's look at the proof. Let ei be an event occurring at Pi, and ej be an event occurring at Pj,
such that ei happens before ej. This is Lamport's happens
before relationship. The snapshot algorithm ensures
that if ej is in the cut, then ei is also in the cut, okay? We are going to prove this fact. If this fact were true, then this would
mean that the consistency condition for the consistent cut is obeyed and so the result of the snapshot algorithm
is in fact a consistent cut. In other words, what we want to show is that if ej happens
before Pj records its own state, meaning ej actually belongs to the cut calculated
by the Global Snapshot algorithm, then it must also be true that ei happens
before Pi records its own state, that is ei is also a part of the cut calculated
by the Global Snapshot algorithm. So let's prove this by contradiction. Let's assume that the first condition
is true, which is that ej is a part of the cut, so ej happens before
Pj records its own state. But that the second condition is not true
which is that Pi records its own state is in fact happens before ei, okay? So, because all the events at Pi
are ordered linearly because Pi's clock, if its not true that ei happened before
Pi records its own state, the reverse must be true which is that Pi records
its own state must happen before ei. Along with this, you also have
the fact that ei happened before ej. So, consider the causal path
that goes from ei to ej, along that causal path consider all
the sequences of process timelines, and all the channels on which messages
pass along that causal path. Due to the FIFO ordering
on the causal paths and the linear ordering of events at
each process, it must be true that the markers on each link above proceed
the regular application messages. Why do the markers proceed
the regular application messages? Because Pi records its own
state before ei happens and so the markers are sent out when Pi records
its own state, and so the markers which proceed on the causal path from ei to
ej will proceed the ei to ej messages. But then this automatically means
that the marker is received at the process Pj before the event
ej happens that crosses Pj. But then this means that Pj must have
received the marker before ej, and so it cannot be true that ej happened
before Pj records its own state. And so we have a contradiction here. And so what we assumed in the green
statement over here at the top of the slide must be false. And so it must be true that
if ej belongs to the cut, then ei also belongs to the cut. That completes our proof. In the next lecture, we'll see some examples of kinds of
properties which the Chandy-Lamport algorithm is used to detect in
the global distributed system itself. [MUSIC]