Okay, so in this lecture we'll see the actual, uh, algorithm, the classical algorithm
that is used, uh, to calculate a global snapshot,
uh, in a distributed system. So once again,
just to remind you, uh, the goal here is
to record a global snapshot which consists of a state
for each of the processes in the system and a state for each
of the channels in the system. Uh, once again, when someone
gives you a problem, just make sure that you know
what the system model is under which you're trying
to solve the problem. Uh, here the system model
is as follows. We have N processes
in the system. Between every pair of processes there are two communication channels, one going each way. So between two processes Pi
and Pj, there is two channels, one from Pi to Pj,
one from Pj to Pi. Each of these
communication channels, uh, the goes one process
to another, is FIFO ordered. When I say FIFO it means
first-in, first-out. This means that if, uh,
on a channel from Pi to Pj, a message M1 is sent first
and then message M2 is sent, M1 is received first at Pj
and only then is M2 received. We also assume that there
are no failures at processes, and also that messages
are not dropped, they are intact, and that they are not duplicated. Uh, w-uh, some
of these assumptions, especially the failure
and message assumptions, uh, have been addressed
by subsequent variants of the classical protocol
we are gonna discuss, okay, but for now we'll just assume,
uh, what was assu-assumed in the original, uh,
classical algorithm. So some of the requirements are that the snapshot calculation must not interfere with the normal application
operations or messages. It must not require processes
to, uh, stop doing what they're trying to do or,
um-uh, stop sending messages. We want, uh, the algorithm to continue concurrently
and simultaneously with the other application,
um, operations. We want each process to be able
to record its own state. When I say a process state,
I really mean, uh, either an application-
defined state or, uh, failing that, a state
that captures the entire, uh, state of the process, uh, its heap registers, program, uh, code, program counter, code,
um, stack, and anything else that might appear
in the coredump of that process. Uh, the global state
is collected in a distributed manner. We do not want centralized
collection of, uh, the, uh, of, uh, of the state, and, uh, we want any process
to be able to initiate or start
the snapshot collection. Now there might be
multiple snapshot collections that might occur in the system,
perhaps even simultaneously. Each of these runs
would be distinguished by using a unique ID. For now, for most of
our examples we'll just assume there's one run
of the snapshot algorithm that is happening in the system. So, uh, here is the snapshot
algorithm in two slides. Uh, in the first slide we say
what the initiator process does, and in the second slide we'll
say what the other processes do. Uh, the initiator process, uh,
first records its own state, and again, by state I mean
either application state or the coredump state. Then the initiator process
creates special messages called marker messages, and on each of the,
um, and these marker messages, um, are not
application messages. They do not interfere
with application messages, but when a marker message
is sent on a channel, it is ordered alongside
other application messages. In other words, if a process Pi
sends some application messages and then a marker message, uh,
the marker message is delivered only after those application
messages on that channel. Similarly, any application
messages sent after the marker are delivered only after
the marker is received on that channel. So, returning to the algorithm,
once the initiator has recorded its own state, it then sends out a marker on each of the N-1
outgoing channels, from Pi itself to the other
processes, uh, Pj, where j is not
equal, uh, to i. Uh, finally it starts recording,
uh, the incoming messages of each of the incoming channels
at Pi-that is Cji for um, again these are N-1
incoming channels at Pi. So markers were sent
out from the initiator. What happens when a process
Pi receives a marker? This could be any process in the
system, not just the initiator. When Pi receives a marker
on an incoming channel, say Cki, which means that Pi is receiving
the marker from process Pk, if this is the first time that the, uh, Pi,
process Pi is seeing a marker, meaning it's the first marker
that Pi is receiving, then the first thing that Pi
does is record its own state. This could be the application
state or a coredump of Pi, or anything that captures
the history of Pi. Next, uh, Pi marks the state
of the incoming channel Cki on which it received this first
marker as being empty, okay, so this is going to be the
final state of this channel Cki in the final global snapshot. Then on the, uh, uh,
N-1 outgoing channels, um, Cij from Pi outwards,
uh, Pi sends a marker out, okay? Uh, finally, uh, Pi starts
recording the incoming messages on each of- of the
incoming channels at Pi except the one that it just, uh, marked at state 4, which is Cki. So for the other N-2 incoming
channels, other than Cki, uh, it starts recording, uh,
the incoming messages on them. This is important because we want to, uh, capture
the messages in transit as well, so when Pi receives a marker
for the second or the third time where it's already seen
a marker message before, and this, uh, duplicate
marker message is being received on channel Cki, then, uh, Pi marks
the state of channel Cki as consisting of all those
messages that have arrived on Cki since Pi first turned
on recording, okay? So between the time that Pi
received its first-first marker until a marker was received
on channel Cki, uh, all the messages that have
been received on channel Cki are considered
to be part of Cki's state. So essentially here what
I'm saying is that, uh, all the processes
will end up sending, uh, marker messages
to each other, and this will ensure
that all the channels have their states snapshotted. Uh, of course, the state of a
channel is snapshotted only at, uh, the, um, uh, process
that is at the receiving end of that channel. The algorithm terminates when
all the processes have received, uh, one marker message so that
they record their own states, and then, um, all the channels
have had one marker message, uh, transit through them
and be received at them. This would make sure that, uh, all the, uh,
N-1 incoming channels at each process
have their states recorded. Later on, if needed,
a central server can collect all these partial
snapshot pieces to calculate
the global snapshot, and then, uh, you know,
check whatever global property is required, but again, that's
optional; that's not required. The global snapshot calculation
and collection itself, the original collection is
in fact a distributed operation. So let's see an example of this,
um-uh, snapshot algorithm, uh, at work. So here's an example
of three processes. Time goes from left
to right again. Uh, the, uh, events shown here, both, um, uh, instructions
such as A and C, uh, as well as message sends
like B and the message-receives like E are
all application messages. Uh, so, uh, when P1
the initiator starts its, uh, collection, this is being done
concurrently and simultaneously alongside the
application messages. So as initiator P1 starts its,
um, uh, uh, algorithm by recording its own state, we'll call that as S1, it sends out markers on the two outgoing channels C12 and C13, and it turns on recording on the incoming
channels C21 and C31. Next, uh, P3 receives
the marker from P1. This is the first marker
that P3 is seeing, so it records its own state; let's call that state as S3. It marks the state
of the incoming channel on which the marker just came
in, which is C13, as MT. Next it turns on recording
on the other incoming channels, which is just C23 in this case. Finally it sends out markers on, uh, all the outgoing channels over here, okay, which is C31 and C32. I'll summarize that via
this, uh, simple text here. Uh, next, um-uh, the marker
from P3 is received at P1. Uh, clearly this is a duplicate
marker that P1 is seeing, so, uh, at this time
it stops recording the state of the channel on which it just received
the marker, which is C31. Uh, it started recording
the state, uh, when it recorded
its own state S1, and in the meantime, no messages
have been received from, uh, P3, so the state of channel
C31 is marked as being empty. Next, uh, the, uh, marker
for P3 is received at P2. This is the first marker
that P2 is seeing. The marker from P1 that was
sent to P2 is still in pr- in progress, it's still
in transit in the network. Uh, so when P2 receives
this marker, the first marker it's seeing, and, uh, so it records its own
state as, um, uh, own state; we call that as S2. It marks the state
of the channel on which the marker just came in, C32, as being empty, and finally it turns
on recording on the-on the other
incoming channel, which is C12, and it also sends out markers, because this is the first marker that it's seen. Uh, next, uh, the marker
from P1 is received at P2. This is a duplicate marker,
so P2 stops recording, uh, messages on the channel C12 and marks the state of channel
C12 to all the messages that have been
received since S2. That is empty, and so the state
of channel S-C12 is marked as empty. Uh, we are not yet done. P2 next, uh, s-uh, uh,
P2's marker is received at P1. This is duplicate, so it's, uh,
so the channel C21's state on which the marker
has just been received is marked as consisting
of all the messages since, uh, S1 until a marker
is received on C21. Notice that this message, uh,
that had the send event of G and the receive event of D, uh, was received in between
when S1 was recorded until C21's, uh,
state stopped being recorded. So that message is, uh,
considered to be a part of the state of the channel C21. Obviously, uh, this
doesn't refer to, uh, the, um, an actual
physical point of time at which this g-global snapshot
has been calculated, but at some, uh,
past point of time at which the snapshot
was in fact true. Next, uh, the, um-uh, marker
for P2 is received at P3, and again this is
a duplicate marker, and, uh, the state
of the channel C23 is, uh, said to be consisting
of all the messages that were received since S3
was calculated, and that's just empty
in this case. So at this point,
the algorithm has terminated because all the, uh, processes have calculated their,
uh, states, and all the channel states of all the six channels in the
system have been calculated. Uh, you could, if you wanted, uh, to collect the global snapshot pieces in one place and then calculate
whatever global property you want to calculate on this, but this is again optional; uh, it's not really needed for the original global
snapshot calculation itself. Now, the global
snapshot calculated by the Chandy-Lamport algorithm is not actually, may not actually be,
have been true at any physical point
of time in the past, but it is causally correct, so, uh, it is correct
in the sense of causality. What does this really mean? We'll see this
in the next lecture.