Following from our, uh,
previous, uh, lecture on, uh, Chord, uh, today we'll discuss, uh,
the effects of failures, um, on Chord and how Chord tackles,
uh, failures and churn. So when you have, uh,
peers that fail, the lookups might go wrong. So for instance,
in our previous example, where N80 was trying
to route to 42, if one of the intermediate
nodes, 32 in this case, uh, had failed and
the corresponding successors and finger table entries
had not been updated, then 16 does not even know
about the existence of 45, and it cannot forward it to 45. In fact, it can't forward it
to anyone because, uh, the next hop would in fact be the origin
query node in this case. So in this case the-the query
would in fact, uh, be lost and would never
receive a response. So one of the solutions to this is, uh, for nodes to maintain not just one successor entry but multiple successor entries, so, uh, the nodes maintain
up to r successor entries where r is
a fixed number systemwide but is a configurable number. How large does r need to be for, uh, queries
to be routed correctly in spite of a large number
of failures? Well, it turns out
that r=2log(N) or O(log(N)) suffices to maintain
lookup correctness with high probability;
that's what w.h.p. means. Uh, in other words, a ring stays
connected, uh, in spite of this. Why is this? Well, essentially remember that
the mechanism we are using here is that a node
goes through its successors, and if it finds
at least one successor alive, then it forwards
a query to that successor, and if this happens
at every node in the system that is alive, then we consider
that the query gets forwarded. Suppose as me is 50%
of the nodes fail in the system simultaneously. Yes, this is not
a common occurrence, but let's say this happens. Then, at a given node, the probability that at least
one of its successors is alive is 1 minus the probability that
all its successors are dead. Since 50% of the nodes fail, this probability
is (1/2)^2log(N). That's the probability
that all its successors, all its r=2log(N)
successors are dead. And so 1 minus that is the probability that at least
one of its successors is alive, and if you calculate this, because you're taking
log base 2, this is 1-(1/(N^2)). You want this to be true at all
the nodes that are alive that have not failed, and so the probability
of that happening is just this, uh, quantity raised
to the number of alive nodes, which is N^2, and there's a well-known limit
theorem that shows that this is e^-(1/2N), which is actually equal wa-to 1-(1/2N)
when, uh, N is large enough. And again, this is a well-known
limit theorem over here. And so you'll notice that this
number goes to 1 very quickly as N goes to infinity. So this is saying that
as the number of nodes or peers in your system scales up
as your system becomes larger, the probability
of lookup correctness will in fact increase and
go closer and closer to 1, which is a very good thing. This shows that the system
is fairly scalable. The other thing that could go
wrong is that the node or the peer storing the file
might itself fail. If 45 fails, then there is no copy
of the file cnn.com/index.html, and so no matter
where you route the query or what intelligent
routing you use, you'll never get
a copy of the file 'cause it doesn't exist. So the way to combat this
is to replicate the file. So you store multiple copies
of the file, uh, one at N45, but also some at its successors
and predecessors. So in this case you store
it at one successor and one predecessor, so N80 has a copy of the file and N32 also has
a copy of the file. In this case because N80 has
a copy of the file, its query becomes moot,
so it can just do a local search and the query is answered, but if N96 were sending
the query instead, then the query might
be able to hit N32 and, uh, N32 could respond back directly. So this has the second
additional advantage, other than fault tolerance,
of also load balancing. If you have a key that
is very popular, for instance, you are storing a file
that is an mp3 of a recently-released song
that is, uh, in the top 5 on the, um, uh,
Billboard top 100 list, then this file is likely to
receive a lot of, uh, queries, and so if you spread this file
out over multiple replicas, uh, the load on each of these
replicas also goes down. So load balancing
is a very important concern over here as well. So, so far we have discussed,
uh, peer failures, but no, uh, but peers
can also join the system and also leave the system. In general
this is known as churn, which is a high rate of, uh, peers or nodes joining, leaving and failing
from the system. Churn could be as high as 25% in
some, uh, peer-to-peer systems such as eDonkey, and as high as
100% in systems like Gnutella. Essentially this means that if
you had a Gnutella network, uh, if 10 million nodes were,
uh, in-in the Gnutella system at the beginning of the hour,
by the end of the hour, uh, 10 million nodes would have, uh, joined, left and failed away
from the system. It may not be the same set
of 10 million that were there
at the beginning, but it's a total count
of 10 million. The churn is lower
in managed clusters and in, um, in-in, uh, clouds such as, um, experimental clouds like PlanetLab and Emulab, and also, uh, clouds
such as the AWS, uh, but it's still present;
it's not zero. So when churn does happen,
essentially you need to update successors and finger table entries. Why, because you want to get
O(log(N)), um, lookup cost for your, uh, queries
and for your other operations. Also, you may need
to copy some keys. Um, you'll see why in a moment. So when a new peer joins, um, here's how it initializes its, uh, uh, membership list or its finger tables
and successor entries. Remember that the new peer
joins the system by contacting a well-known introducer using a DNS, we discussed this
a few lectures ago, and the DNS, um, uh,
the server that it contacts gives it the, uh, IP address
of some peer in the system. And now, you can use this peer
to route to its own ID, so the peer that is joining,
say, has an ID of 40. It routes a message to N40 using the regular
Chord routing protocol, and this makes its way to N45, because 45 is the first,
um, uh, peer that is immediately
clockwise of N40. Assuming that 45 knows its
predecessor, at this point N40, when it receives back
the acknowledgement from N45, knows its successor as well
as its predecessor in the ring. At this point, uh, the N32 upda-updates
its successor to N40, the new node, N40 initializes
its successor to N45, and it copies the finger
tables over from N45, okay? So it just doesn't copy it over;
it uses the population of, uh, peers that N45 knows about and considers that as the
entire population of the system, and uses those, along
with its finger table rules, to initialize its finger table. However, these finger table
entries may not be correct, because N45's neighbors were only a small subset
of the entire system. So in order
to, uh, have N40 know about more and more peers
in the system, a stabilization protocol
runs in the background. Essentially, the stabilizing
protocol, uh, which runs periodically
at each node, the node asks
its immediate neighbors, finger table entries
as well as successors, for their finger table entries
and successors. This, uh, gives it a larger
population of, uh, peers to consider
as its potential neighbors, and this will, uh, over time lead to more and more correct finger table entries and successors for the node. This stabilization protocol
is run by a newly joined node periodically as well as by all the nodes
that are there in the system. Essentially, any node
that is there in a Chord ring will have to run
the stabilization protocol periodically forever. So essentially,
as the churn happens, the stabilization protocol is always trying to play catchup and update the finger table entries and successors to the correct values in spite of churn already
happening in the system. So if the rate
of the stabilization protocol is fast enough, then it can-it can keep up
with the rate of churn. The other thing that needs to
happen when N40 joins the system is some keys need
to be copied over. Remember that the invariant
for keys was that the key, or the files stored
at the first peer that is immediately
to the clockwise of the key. So keys like 34 and 38 which
were previously stored at N45, will now need to be stored
at N40, because 40 is now, uh, the first peer immediately
to the clockwise of 34 and 38. So some of these keys will need
to be copied over, and this might mean
file transfer between, uh, the successor
of the newly joining node and the newly joining node. Now, over time the stabilization
protocol affects not just the newly joining nodes, finger table entries and successors, but also the finger table
entries and successors of some of the existing nodes. Why is this? Well let's go back
to the previous slide. Say some node was over here
and it's N+2^i for its ith finger table
entry fell at 33. Earlier, that ith finger table
entry was, um, of that node, was 45, but now it needs
to be updated to 40. How does this happen? Well over time 112 as is run- as it runs
its stabilization protocol, gets to know about
N40 eventually, and then it says "Aha! N40 is a better
finger table entry- ith finger table entry
than N45," and it updates
its ith finger table entry. So you can show that, um,
a new peer affects O(log(N)) other finger table entries
in the system on average. This is because of the symmetry, um, because every node
points to O(log(N)), uh, finger table entries. Um, then you can show that, uh, a newly-non, an,
because a newly joined peer has O(log(N))
finger table entries or the log(N)
other finger table entries throughout the entire system
would get affected and, uh, point
to the new peer on average. So the number
of messages per peer join is about O(log(N)*log(N)). Uh, and we have so-
we have discussed so far the, uh, the, uh,
messages required, or the techniques required
for dealing with failures as well as with node joins. Dealing with the peers
leaving voluntarily is similar to dealing
with failures, um, uh, uh, and, um, and-and essentially, uh, i-it has a similar
set of operations as we have-
as we've discussed so far. In order to deal with failures, you also need
a failure detector, uh, which we have discussed, uh,
elsewhere in, uh, the course. So a little bit about
the stabilization protocol. Uh, essentially, when you
have concurrent peer joins, leaves and failures, you don't just have one node joining and leaving
in the entire system. Because th-the scale
of the system is very large, you might have nodes simultaneously joining and leaving the system. To tackle this, uh, Chord peers
run the stabilization algorithm, which updates
the pointers and keys. It ensures non-loopiness
of fingers, uh, so that queries are not
just looping around forever but they actually make progress, and it ensures eventual success of, uh, lookups and, uh, efficient logarithmic lookups with high probability. Each stabilization round
at a peer involves a constant number of messages. Uh, essentially, uh, it
either queries a small number of, uh, its successors and finger table entries, or it queries all of them and log(N) can be considered
to be a constant. Now a notion of strong stability which means actual correctness of all finger table entries and, uh, um, finger table and-and successors, it takes
O(N^2) stabilization rounds. So once churn has stopped
in the system, you'd need another
O(N^2) stabilization rounds. Now, even though
the stabilizations were run periodically at nodes, uh, one of the things
is that, uh, the stabilization at each node is independent of the stabilization
at the other nodes, so they are not synchronized
with each other, and yet it takes
O(N^2) stabilization rounds, um, across nodes. So essentially
it takes O(N^2) time for the system to stabilize, and some have argued
that this is fairly high. There are more details on this if you're interested in knowing about O(N^2), uh, on the, uh, Chord web page, uh, where there is a tech report
that outlines these. So churn, as we have discussed,
uh, can be very high, uh, 25% to 100% in the system, and this could leave to-
lead to excessive copying. Remember that whenever nodes
join, leave and fail from the system, you need to, uh, transfer
some files over so that the file storage
invariants are maintained. Uh, the stabilization algorithm might also consume
more bandwidth to keep up, partly because
of these file transfers. If you're transferring mp3s
and MPEGs around all the time due to churn, uh, this is a fairly high uh, bandwidth usage. However, you can fix this
by using a level of indirection. As they say, uh, solution
to a lot of problems in computer science is to use
another level of indirection. Essentially, in this particular
case it means that instead of storing, uh,
the file at a particular peer, that is, to the clockwise of it, you store a pointer to the file. The file stays, for instance,
at the peer that uploaded it, but a-a pointer to it is the one
that is, uh, stored at, uh, the peer immediately
to the clockwise of the file ID, and whenever, uh, this peer, uh, is affected by a failure
or a-or a peer leave, uh, only the meta information
or the pointer about the file is changed around. This leads to a reduction
in the bandwidth that is used for copying keys when you have
no churn in the system. The other option is, uh, to push
this all the way through, uh, into the system itself and to replicate the entire
metadata as you will see, uh, with the Kelips system which we'll discuss
in a couple of lectures. Uh, one of the tricks
that Chord uses, uh, to achieve more load balance, uh, is that, uh, uses
the notion of virtual nodes. Because the hash, uh, function is not guaranteed
to be uniform, uh, this may lead
to bad load balancing, where if you have a long segment between you and your predecessor on the ring, you being a peer, uh, there a very large number
of keys may be assigned to you. In order to prevent this, every node pretends
to be multiple virtual nodes and joins as multiple
virtual nodes in the ring, and when you have
a larger population, this leads to a more, uh, load balanced set of segments, um, and so a more evenly load balanced, uh, distribution of, uh, keys or files across the, uh, peers in the system. So virtual ring and consistent
hashing that we studied in Chord are widely used
in key-value stores today, uh, Cassandra, Riak, uh, LinkedIn's
Voldemort, and Amazons DynamoDB, and a variety
of other key-value stores. Even though those
key-value stores no- don't necessarily use
all the techniques of these, um, of the Chord
peer-to-peer system, a lot of the techniques are
used, uh, as we'll see later on. Uh, the Chord project has been
used to build file systems such as CFS,
and Ivy on top of it, uh DNS system on top of it, uh, and an Internet Indirection
Infrastructure on top of it at Berkeley, uh, and it has spawned many
interesting, uh, research ideas and issues about
peer-to-peer systems. For more information, you can refer to this
URL noted on this, uh, slide.