[MUSIC] As you know, this course is
titled Cloud Computing Concepts. However a major portion of this
course is going to be spent discussing Distributed Systems Concepts. So what is the relation between clouds and
distributed systems? In this lecture and the next one, I argue that a cloud
is in fact a distributed system. So a cloud consists of hundreds
to thousands of machines on the data center side collected
in an integrated center. This we call as a server side. On the client side there might be
thousands to millions maybe even more machines which are accessing services
that are hosted by these servers. Maybe web pages, maybe websites,
maybe objects that are being stored, and maybe a variety of different services. So that's on the client side. The servers on the data center side
on the server side communicate amongst one another. So there is communication going on there. The clients, of course,
directly communicate with the servers. Each client can communicate with one or
more servers. For instance, every time you
access your Facebook profile, your client process,
whichever browser you're running your Facebook client on is going to
access multiple Facebook servers. Some for the photos, some for the profile,
some for the wall, and so on and so forth. The clients, of course,
may also communicate with each other. This is, of course, something
that happens in a cloud, as well. Now all these communications
that I described mean that a cloud is in
fact a distributed system. The fact that servers communicate
amongst one another means that, that is a distributed system consisting
of many different servers sending and receiving messages amongst one another. We call this as a cluster. A cluster is a collection of machines that are communicating with
one another over a network. The clients communicating with the servers
also make a distributed system. A very large scale distributed system. The clients communicating with each other,
for instance in a peer-to-peer system like Bertard also mean that is a very
large scale distributed system. So all these different aspects
that I've described for a cloud are also aspects
of a distributed system. In fact if you remember the last lecture
where we discussed the four distinguishing features of clouds, all these features are in fact features
of distributed systems as well. The fact that you have
many servers in a cloud, massive scale,
means that that is a distributed system. The fact that you can access multiple
servers any where, the on-demand nature of clouds, means that again that's a feature
of distributed systems as well. And that means that clouds are a special
class of distributed systems. The data and its nature. When you have lots of data you need to
cluster many different machines to store the data and
again that means a distributed system. And of course the programing paradigms
that exist today Hadoop/Mapreduce, NoSQL storage systems. All of these require clusters. All of these require many different
machines communicating with each other. So what I'm essentially saying is that
a cloud is a special kind of distributed system, and in fact a cloud is the latest
nickname for a distributed system. Previous nicknames that you have
already seen in a previous lecture have included peer-to-peer systems,
grids, clusters, and time-shared computers when we
saw the data processing industry. All of these are distributed systems, so
every one of these is a special kind or a special class of distributed systems,
and so is a cloud, cloud is no exception. And so nicknames come and
go and different kinds or classes of distributed systems come and
go but the core concepts that underlie
distributed systems stay the same. And these core concepts continue
to be used decade after decade. As an example Lamport timestamps which you
will study later on in this course were invented way back in the 1970s and 80s but
they still continue to be used today in almost all the cloud and distributed
systems that are implemented today. They're a very core concept and that's
why it's important for us to know it. And this is why this course is really
about these distributed systems concepts. We do not want to be restricted
only to the cloud but in fact want to study the core concepts
that underlie distributed systems. Not just the cloud
computing systems today. But the systems that have existed for
many decades in the past, and that are going to be around for
many decades in the future. For instance, a few years from now,
there may be a new nickname, a new generation of distributed systems. However, the core concepts will
likely remain the same, and they will continue to be
used in real systems. And that's why we focus and
study these core concepts in this course. So our next goal is going to be to try
to define the term distributed system. We'll do that in the next lecture. [MUSIC]