Today we'll discuss, uh, another, uh, peer-to-peer system
that came out of academia. Um, this system
is called Pastry. This system was, uh, designed
by Anthony Rowstron from Microsoft
Research Cambridge, and Peter Druschel from, uh,
Rice University, um. And just like Chord, uh, this, uh, system
assigns IDs to nodes using a consistently-consistent
hashing function, so again, you can imagine a virtual ring
where peers are hashed onto a point on the ring. But the way in which, uh,
neighbors are maintained is slightly different in Pastry. Uh, the first kind of neighbor
that, uh, Pastry nodes maintain is a leaf set. So each node knows
its successors and predecessors, multiple successors,
multiple predecessors. This is kind of similar to the Chord successors
and predecessors. Uh, however, uh,
the routing tables, uh, instead of using the N+2^i rule that we used for Chord instead use prefix matching. This is sort of like
hypercube routing. So routing is based
on prefix matching and turns out to be O(log(N)) because a hypercube with N points is O(log(N)) in diameter. In addition Pastry, unlike
Chord, also pays attention to the underlying
network, uh, topology and tries to make, uh, the neighbor, uh, edges to be short in the underlying
neighboring topology as well. We'll see how that works, uh. So in Pastry
let's consider a peer with ID, uh, shown, 01110100101. Uh, this peer maintains,
uh, a neighbor peer with an ID matching
each of the following prefixes. Okay, so the first
prefix is a star (*). Essentially when I say a *,
I mean that the first bit is a bit that differs from this
peer's corresponding bit. So essentially this would be
any of the peers that starts its ID with a 1 instead of a 0. Uh, then, um, the next, uh,
neighbor it maintains, uh, this peer maintains,
is one that starts with a 0, and then the next bit
is different from this peer, so the next bit
would essentially be a 0, okay, so a 0, 0 and
then followed by whatever, else. Similarly, the next one
is a 0, 1 and a 0, because that differs
from this bit, uh, here, and, uh, so on and so forth. 'Cause, essentially,
if there is a, uh, peer with an ID that contains m bits, the peer might have
up to m, uh, neighbors, one for each
of the prefix matches. Now, given this, when you
need to route, ah, a message to a peer, say, suppose,
this peer with the ID that we considered earlier needs to route it
to a peer that is 01110111001, the first, uh, mismatching bit
that is different is, uh, this, uh, seventh bit over here
which is 1, okay? So the 0111101
is the matching prefix, and the next bit 1
is a, uh, differing bit. So this, uh, peer
that has the message, uh, destined for this
given IP address, uh, starts by forwarding it
to that neighbor of itself which has
the largest matching prefix. So in this case, it would be the neighbor
that starts with 011101, and then a 1, and
then followed by whatever. Uh, it might also have neighbors that have a larger
matching prefix, and if it does, then it forwards a message
to that neighbor. You can show that, uh,
this, uh, results in a O(log(N)) routing time
for messages in Pastry. Once again,
I hope you, uh, notice that this prefix routing
is fairly different, uh, and is, uh, unlike the routing
that was used in the Chord DHT that you saw earlier. Now, prefix matching is nice because it allows you
to be, uh, aware of the underlying
network distances. So for each prefix, uh, that a node wants
to maintain a neighbor for, say 011*, there
are many potential neighbors, all of which have, uh, a prefix
011 that start, uh, at their ID. Uh, among all these
potential neighbors, uh, you select that neighbor which has the shortest
round-trip time in the underlying network. So this allows the hop from you
to one of your neighbors, in this case 011*, uh,
to be, uh, the closest among all the potential neighbors for 011*. Now, since shorter prefixes, uh, mean, um, that there are, uh, many more, uh, candidates, shorter prefixes mean that there
are many more possibilities for the, uh, for the suffix, uh, it's likely that the closest one of these is much closer to you than, uh, it is
for a longer prefix. So in essentially, uh,
you're saying that, uh, going back to the previous slide the candidates
in these shorter prefixes are likely to be very close
to you in the round-trip time in the underlying network, as long as you select
the closest candidate among all. So when you use prefix routing, essentially this means
that the first few hops, the early hops
in the, uh, in the query are in fact very short hops, and the later hops
are much longer hops in the- uh, in the
underlying network. However, you can show, uh, as the original authors
and designers have shown, that the overall stretch compared to the
direct internet path between the querying node and
the eventual destination node is in fact very small and, uh,
is just a constant factor, which means that Pastry,
in spite of being able, i-in spite of routing via
many, ah, intermediate peers, is able to get you, uh, an
end-to-end, uh, round-trip time which is comparable, uh, to the underlying
internet round-trip time between the querying node and
the eventual destination node. So summarizing Chord and Pastry; Chord and Pastry are both more structured than Gnutella. They are essentially distributed
hash tables in the sense that they, uh, enable you to do
Insert, Lookup, Delete, Update, and essentially any operation
on the key in O(log(N)) time. Uh, the lookup algorithms are
essentially routing algorithms, so they are black
box algorithms. Uh, the churn handling
can get complex. Uh, Pastry also uses similiz-
similar stabilization protocol, um, or I shouldn't say similar, it uses a stabilization protocol uh, which has
the same goals as Chord. The memory is O(log(N)), because you maintain
O(log(N)) neighbors to look-up cost
results of O(log(N)). Um, uh, yet the O(log(N))
lookup costs may be high. We did say that log(N)
was a small number, but it's not 1, it's not 2. It's still maybe 10, 20, 30, uh, and, uh, if you're considering log(N) log base 2 and you're still saying order, which means that there is
a constant factor on top of it. So the next question that
arises, can we really design a system that has just
an O(1) lookup cost, just a constant number
of hops for the lookup? That's the next
system we'll discuss.