[MUSIC] So in this lecture we're going to look at
how to combine a membership protocol or failure introduction
along with a Multicast. This is often and very popularly implemented in
an abstraction known as virtual synchrony. Virtual synchrony also known as view
synchrony attempts to preserve multicast ordering and reliability in spite of
failures of what happened in the system. It combines a membership protocol
with a multicast protocol. Systems that implemented
virtual synchrony or view synchrony, such as Isis from
Cornell University have been used in many important scenarios including
the New York Stock Exchange, the French Air Traffic Control System,
and the Swiss Stock Exchange. Virtual synchrony or view synchrony has
an important concept known as Views. Each process maintains
a membership list and you've seen how membership protocols
work earlier in the course. This membership list is called a View. An update to the membership
list is called a View Change. For instance, if a process joins,
this may be reflected in the view and that would be a View Change. If a process leaves or a process fails then those would
be reflected in the view as well. That would be a View Change. Multiple changes may be made to a view and
that would just count as a single View Change if
those changes are made simultaneously. So for instance. A process P1 might be
added to the view and simultaneously process P2
might be drop from the view. That would just be a single view change
where both those updates were done simultaneously. Virtual synchrony or views synchrony
guarantees that all the view changes are delivered in the same order at
all the correct processes in the group. So for instance if a correct
process P1 receives views, which are somewhat like the following. The first view has only itself, P1. The second view has itself along
with two other processes, P1, P3. The next view only has P1 or
P2, P3 was dropped. And the next view has P1,
P2 and P4, where P4 was added. Then any of the correct process also
received the same sequence of view changes after it joins the group. So, for instance, if you construct P2 and
the views it receives, P2's first view would be P1, P2, P3,
because that's when it joins the group. But after that,
its next view would be P1, P2. It would have to be the same
as the next view that P1 got. And then the third view that P2
reviews would also be the same as P1's next view which will be P1,
P2, P4 over here. That is the same as P1's,
our next view as well. In other words, as long as you can see
only the correct process in the group of the sequence of view changes
that they receive is in fact the same as all the other
current processes in the group. When the process fails,
then you stop considering it. But as long as the process is alive,
all the views that it receives are in fact in the same order as
the other correct process in the system. Now the times at which the views
are delivered at the processes might be different at different process,
but the ordering is the same. So again, here the insistence is on
the ordering of them being the same. In other words, the views being totally
audited in all of the processes, but they may of course be delivered
at different physical times. And this is why it is somewhat
known as virtual synchrony, but we'll come back to the name later on. So that's about abuse. What about the multicasts that are sent
out among the processes in the group? Now a multicast M is said to be delivered
in a view V at a process Pi If and only if Pi receives the view V. And then before Pi delivers the next
view after V, it delivers multicast M. because in other words multicast M
is delivered in between view V and the next view that follows V. Then M is said to be
delivered in the view V. In other words, what we are saying
is that when M is delivered view V was the membership
list at the process Pi. Now multisynchronicity requires that
the set of multicasts delivered in a given view is the same set of multicasts
at all the correct processes that are in that view. This says that suppose
the view consists of to P3 then the set of multicasts
received at P1 in that same view is the same the set of multicasts
received P2 in the same view. In other words,
what happens in a view stays in that view. It does not go outside that view. Okay, this is a good rule of thumb
to remember virtual synchrony by. He also required the sender of
the mutlicast message to believe to that view otherwise it would make sense for
a multicast to be received. Within a view when the sender is
not a part of the view itself. And what this means is that, if a process
Pi does not deliver a multicast M in view V, while other processes in the view V
delivered multicast M in that same view, V, then Pi will be forcibly removed
from the next view delivered. After we've add these other processes. So, yo have to go with what he rest of
the group is doing otherwise you might be forcibly removed from that group
if you don't satisfy group. So, let's see a few examples that are both
correct from the and also incorrect form the viewpoint of So here's our first
example with process P1, P2, P3, and P4. The first view that all of them deliver
consists of all four processes, so that's our group. Then P1 sends out a multicast message M1,
P2 sends out a multicast message M2, P4 sends out a multicast message M3,
but P4 crashes after that. Because P4 crashes, the next view that is
delivered at P1, P2, P3, the remaining members in the group Consists of only P1,
P2, P3, and that's fine, okay? Now the message M1 is
delivered in the first view, which causes all the four processes. M2 is also delivered in the first view. M2 is not delivered in P4, but
that's fine because P4 crashed anyway. Now the message M3 from P4 is also
delivered at P1, P2, P3 as well as P4 and it is delivered in the same view that
consists of all the four processes. Okay, so satisfies virtual synchrony. This particular run over here. However if I make a small change which
is that a P3 delivers the second view first and only then delivers
the multicast n one from p one. This would not satisfy virtual synchrony
because what happens in the view does not stay in the view. In other words m1 is delivered
by p2 in the earlier view but delivered at p3 in the second view. And that does not satisfy
virtual synchrony. This satisfies virtual synchrony,
where P3 is forced out of the group, and only P1 and P2 are left in the group. And the set of multicast
messages of P1 and P2 received in the old
first view are identical. Okay, this satisfies virtual synchrony. Here's another example of a route that
does not satisfy virtual synchrony. Why does it not satisfy virtual synchrony? Well Notice here that we have the modech as message m2 that is received at process
p1 but is not received at process p3. But p3 was is a part of the next view so in other words this is a multi
pass message m that is not completely reliably delivered inside
the group inside the old view. Okay so
this does not satisfy virtual synchrony. This satisfies virtual synchrony here
because M2 is in fact not delivered at any of the members in
the group in the old view. It's not delivered at P2 either, and this
has virtual synchrony because essentially M2 as a multicast was never sent out,
so never delivered at all in the group. Does not satisfy what you need here you
notice that the multi-cache text message, m1 and m2 willing to the correct view,
and the older view in all across but m3 is delivered in the next view
at process v1 and process v2. And it's delivered in all view process p3, because this does not
satisfy virtual synchrony. You might think that moving this view
ahead now satisfied both virtual synchrony because [INAUDIBLE] at all the other
processes in the system and all the current processes but this [INAUDIBLE] because by the time
the semantic [INAUDIBLE] is delivered. The view does not include the sender p 4
of that multicast message anymore, and so because p 4 is not part of the second
view delivered at the correct processes, the run that I'm showing here is also not correct as far as virtual
synchrony is concerned. And finally here is an example
where dropped by the system and it's not able to tolerate any of
the processes of the group and this satisfies of course virtual
synchrony because what happens in the view stays in the view and
before it has crashed. So, virtual synchrony or virtual
synchronous systems implement membership protocols in the form of views, and also
multicasts in terms of reliability, and they want to ensure
reliability within each view. If you want to implement ordering in a
virtual synchronous system you can do that too because ordering is
orthogonal to reliability, so you can have a Virtually synchronous
system that implements FIFO. Or a virtually synchronous system
that implements causal ordering, or one that implements total ordering, or
one that has a hybrid ordering scheme. Now the name virtual synchrony comes
about, or came about because it's part of running on top of an asynchronous network
with unpredictable delays and failures. The order of membership changes and multicasts that each process sees is
the same at all the other processes. If you use a total ordering protocol, even
if it's a hybrid total ordering protocol, then all the processes see
the event in the system happening in the same order as all
the other processes in the system as long as the processes that you're
talking about are the correct processes. Okay, so instead of landing
on top of an asynchronous network the view the processes behave
are able to behave as if they're running on top of a synchronous system
where all the membership changes and all the multi-cast messages
are delivered in the same order. But then actually the question should
arise whether or not such an abstraction could be used to implement a protocol
that solves the consensus problem. And the answer to this is no because
virtually synchronous systems are still susceptible to what is
known as partitioning. This may happen due to inaccurate failure
detections because a process may be mistakenly detected they will
be removed from the group Also processes may be
forcibly removed from groups. So an example of partitioning is
shown on this slide, where initially, all the four processes, P1, P2,
P3, and P4 are a part of the view. But subsequently, even though P4 is the
only one that crashes, the view has become partitioned where P1 considers only
itself to be a part of the view. And P2 and P3 are different view which
consider only themselves to be a part of the membership list. So P1 is partitioned away from P23, and
such partitions can happen in a virtually synchronous system and this is the feature
that prevents socially synchronous or view synchronous systems from
implementing consensus on top of them. So, that wraps of our
discussion of Multicast. Multicast is an important building block
for cloud computing systems that has been so far many use to it systems for
many decades. Depending on the application need, you can implement either
a flavor of Multicast Ordering. As far as your application
requires level Multicast Ordering. If you don't care about
efficiency then you can implement the Multicast Ordering Reliability. Protocol that we saw or
there are other radians of multicache library protocols that we
have discussed as well in this course. And if you need something really, really strong then you can implement
virtual synchrony or real synchrony. In fact there are many real systems out
there that use these forms of multicast in terms of their ordering that are and
even a devotedly synchronize of framework. [MUSIC]