[MUSIC] In this lecture, we look at, a classical algorithm to the distributed
mutual exclusion, problem. This algorithm is called
the Ricart-Agrawala's Algorithm. Once again, before solving any problem
just remind yourself of the system model. Once again, we assume that, each pair of processes that is connected
by a channel has, the channel be reliable. So if you send messages on the channel,
they are eventually delivered and they're delivered in
first in first out order. We also assume that processes do not fail. So, Ricart-Agrawala's algorithm is a
classical mission exclusion algorithm for distributive systems. It was published in the 1980's. It was invented by Glenn Ricart from
the National Institute of Health and Ashok Agrawala from
the University of Maryland. Unlike the previous algorithms you
have seen from each of the inclusions, the centered and green based algorithms,
there's no token involved here. Instead, this,
algorithm uses notions of causality and it uses multicast inside the blue. It has a lower waiting time to
enter the critical section than the Ring-Based approach. So, here is, the key idea ,and then we'll see an
example of the Ricart-Argawala algorithm. When, a process Pi wants to
enter the critical section, it multicasts a request to
all the other processes. The request includes,
the process ID, Pi, of course. But it also includes,
the current Lamport timestamp. This is the, causal or
logical timestamp at process Pi. Once Pi has sent this, multicast request, it waits until all the other N-1
processes have responded positively. To other requests. When it receives N-1 replies,
it can then enter the critical section. Requests in this system are granted
in the order of causality. The Pi in the request T,
Pi is used to break ties. Because two different processes
might have concurrent requests which might in fact end up
having the same timestamp. You need to have a way to break ties. And the ID of the processes
is used to break ties. Okay.
So here are all the messages in the Ricart-Argawala algorithm and
all the actions in their gory detail. And then we'll see an example
over the next few slides. When a process Pi wants to
enter the critical section, it first sets its state to be Wanted. And then multicasts a request
to all processes, the request simply consists of the Lamport timestamp
at Pi currently, followed by Pi's ID. So that's Ti, Pi. It then waits until all the N-1 other
processes have sent back a reply message. Once it has received this N-1 replies,
it then changes its state to be Held, and it can now enter the critical section. What does a process do when
it receives a request? So, when a process Pi receives a request,
from a Pj, which is tagged as Tj, Pj. Tj being the timestamp of the request,
Lamport timestamp. And Pj being the requester's ID. The Pi,
process first checks if its state is Held. If its state is Held then essentially it
cannot, send back a reply immediately because this means that Pi currently
is in the critical section. In this case Pi would add, the request
to a local queue of waiting requests. On the other hand if Pi's state is
Wanted which means that Pi has, currently another request. That it for
the critical section that has not yet been granted, then Pi checks whether or
not, the timestamp of Pi's own request is less than
the timestamp of the incoming request. Okay, in order to do this,
it first compares the Lamport timestamps. Ti and Tj. If Ti's less than Tj, then this is less
than equal or equal to condition succeeds. If Ti equals Tj, in which case,
the requests were concurrent. Then, it breaks ties by considering
whether i is less than j. If this condition is true,
which means that Pi's own request, has precedence over Pj's request, in this
case also, Pi would queue Pj's request. However, if none of these conditions is
true then Pi send a reply back to Pj. Okay. Now when a process is done
with a critical section, across Pi it's simply change,
changes it's state of Released and it sends a reply to all
of it's queued requests. Now notice that when, the process is
in the critical section it may receive multiple, requests from multiple other
processes for the critical section. It would end up queueing
all of these requests. When it is done with this critical
section, it would send back a reply to all of them saying, hey,
I'm done with that critical section. I am ready to acknowledge all of you
as ready to enter the critical section. That's essentially the algorithm called,
so let's see an example. Here is, again, a system of six
processes N3, N32, N5, N80, N6 and N12. N32 first sends a request message which
has a time stamp of 102 along with N32's own idea of 32. This is multicast out to the other
N-1 proxies in the system. All of them send back reply messages, because none of them are waiting
to access the critical section. N32's state is now Held, meaning that it is currently
enter in the critical section. Now let's make it slightly more complex. Suppose, that two other processes, N12 and N80 also want to access
the critical section. Notice that N32 is currently
also in the critical section, its state currently needs to be Held. However for each of N12 and N80, the state now becomes Wanted because these
are trying to enter the critical section. N12's request has a timestamp of 115. N80, N80's request has
a Lamport timestamp of 110. So let's see what happens now. The next thing that happens is that these
requests are received at some processes in the system. Specifically N6, N3 and N5 receive
both of the requests from N12 and N80. And because N3, N6, and N5 are not waiting for any, are not
waiting to enter the critical section, they send back replies to whoever
they receive requests from. At this point of time, N12 and
N80 each having three reply messages back, but they are waiting for
two other reply messages. The next thing that happens in
the system is that N32 receives these request from N12 and
N80 one after another. Because N32 state is now Held,
it queues both of these requests, both the timestamp as well as the IDs. So. N12's request 115, 12 is queued. Followed by N80's request 110, 80. The order of requ-, of queuing
here doesn't really matter because the replies are sent to the entire queue. Notice here that N12 and N80's requests
to each other are still in transit. So one of them is going
to get the request first. And you might think,
well whoever gets the request first. Is, likely to win the race,
or maybe lose out the race. But in fact,
causality comes to our rescue here. So let's say N12 gets,
N12's request is received first with N80. N80 receives this request
its state is Wanted. So it checks whether or not the incoming
request has a lower timestamp than it. It sees that incoming request
has a timestamp of 115. Which is higher than N80's own request. And so N80 ends up queuing its
queuing the incoming request. And since the incoming request
is queued which means that N80 would not have sent a response,
a reply message back to N12. N12 is going to end up waiting for
N80's, reply message. Next N80's reply message is received at N,
12, which then, is in a Wanted state and it checks whether the incoming
request has a lowertime stamp than it. And in fact, this is true because
the incoming request has a timestamp of 110 while N12's waiting
request has a timestamp of 115. In this case N12 would respond
back with a response message or a reply message back to N80. At this point of time,
N80 has four requests responses back or replies back from the group. N12 has three responses back for
the group. And N32 is currently in
the critical section. N32 then will release
the critical section. Once it is done with the critical section,
it releases its token. Sends back reply messages to N12 and N80. At this point of time,
N80 has five reply messages back. And it can enter the critical section. N12 cannot enter the critical section yet because it does not have
a reply back from N80. It only has four replies. And this is fine because N80 is
queueing the request from N12. When N80 is done with
its critical section. It will then send a reply back to N12, which will then enter
the critical section after that. Why is the Ricart-Agrawala's
algorithm safe? Let's look at the proof a little bit,
informally at least. Two processes Pi and Pj cannot both have access to
the critical section simultaneously because if they did, then both would
have sent a reply message to each other. And this would have meant that,
in the case of, one of them. Ti,i is less than Tj,j. And this is why Pj would
have given permission to Pi. Would have responded with a reply to Pi. And also it must be true
that Tj,j is less than Ti,i. And in this case Pi would
have given a reply to Pj. But both of these are not
possible together, you know, you cannot have two less than three and
also three less than two. That's not possible. So that's the crux of the proof. Now, of course, there is an exception
which some of you might think about, which is that it's possible that,
Ti,i is less than Ti,j. And Pi has already replied to Pj's
request with a positive reply. And only after that does Pi
generate its own request. At this point in time, it seems like Pj will also respond to
Pi's request with a positive reply. And both Pi and Pj might have
access to the critical section. So essentially, Pi gives Pj permission. Then Pi generates a request. And because now Pi's request has a lower
timestamp than Pj's Pj would also give a permission to Pi. However, this cannot occur because
once Pi has received Pj's request, any request that it generates subsequently based on Lamport timestamps based on
causality will have a higher timestamp. Therefore it must be true
that Ti is greater than Tj. This follows directly from. The use of Lamport timestamps. This is very the use of Lamport timestamps
really plays with the correctness and the safety of
the Ricart-Agrawala algorithm. And so, Ti greater than Tj is
a contradiction to what we had assumed, which is Ti,i is less than Tj,j, and
so this situation cannot arise either. Next liveness [COUGH] liveness is
true because in the worst case you process ends up waiting for
all the other N-1 processes to send reply. And once they send a reply, which will
happen, you know, the other N-1 processes might all be in the critical section,
and this process might be the very last. And when that happens,
when this process is given permission,. Then it will be able to
enter the critical section. Finally ordering here is guaranteed
in the sense that request with lower Lamport timestamps
are granted earlier and again if there is a,
conflict in timestamps, then. Then the process ID is used to break ties. But in any case,
if one process generates a request for the lower line stam-,
timestamp than our other process. Then that first process will get it's request satisfied earlier
than the second process. And so, even though we have done better
in the client/synchronization delay compared to the Ring Based approach. The bandwidth has gone up. And the question now is,
can we do better in both of these cases. We'll see that in the next lecture. [MUSIC] [MUSIC]