So in this, uh, lecture today we'll see, uh, how to solve
the consensus problem in the synchronous system model. Uh, once again, if someone
gives you a problem, uh, always remember to make sure you know what the system model is, what are the assumptions
under which you're trying to solve the problem. In the synchronous
distributed system model there are bounds
on message delays, there are bounds on, uh, how, uh-uh, fast each process, uh, can take steps,
and there are bounds, of course, on, uh, the clock drift rates. For instance,
multi-processor systems, uh, which have a common
shared clock across processors fall into this category. Uh, here processes
can crash, as well. Uh, synchronous systems do not
mean there are no failures. Processes can crash by stopping. When a process crashes, uh,
it doesn't execute any more instructions, thereafter. This is typically called
a crash failure or a crash-stop failure. We'll just refer to it
as a failure itself. Uh-uh, this does not include kinds of failures where processes recover
after, uh, crashing. Uh, those can be accommodated
by allowing the process to rejoin
with a different identifier after it crashes. So, uh,
the consensus protocol, uh, in the synchronous system model, uh, assumes that there are,
at most, f processes that crash during the protocol. Uh, f is the number that is less than or equal to n, the total number
of processes in the group. Uh, if you're not sure what
the number of failures is, then just f-f-set f to the n. Uh, all the processes
in this protocol are synchronized
and operate in rounds of time. Uh, so for instance,
here I'm illustrating three rounds, uh,
in the protocol. Uh-uh, the rounds, uh,
are essentially, um-uh, demarcated by specific times at which processes
finish a round and start the next round. And you can do this
in the synchronous system model because, uh, the, uh,
process clocks are, um-uh, not drifting
by more than a bound, so you can
actually specify times at which all the processes
will end their previous round, and then start the next round. So the algorithm proceeds
in f+1 rounds where, remember, f is the number
of processes that crash, that-the maximum number
of processes that crash, um, and, uh, the algorithm uses
reliable communication, to all members. Think of this as, uh,
using some variant of, uh, TCP. Uh, the algorithm uses an area
known as values, uh, _i^r. Uh, this refers
to the set of proposed values that are known
to the process P_i, that's the subscript, at the beginning
of round number r, where r goes from 1 to f+1. This will come through
in, uh, the algorithm pseudocode which we'll see
on the next slide. So here is the algorithm
in all its glory. Uh, initially at process pi, this is the algorithm
for process pi, the values array
is set to be empty. This is at the beginning
of round 0. Then at the beginning
of the first round you include process pi's
own contribution, small vi, into the values array. Then in each
of the following rounds you do the same
following thing. First of all, you ma-m-you
multicast all new values that you have received
since the previous round. So in the first round this would just be the process pi as value, uh, small vi, but in the subsequent rounds
you might receive other values from other processes
and you would multicast these new values
that you've received in just the last round. You wait to receive values
from the other processes, so you set your values
for the next r+1th round to be the same as your values
in the rth round, and then for every new value Vj that you receive from the other processes, you include Vj
in the values array. In the next round,
r+1th round, you would use this
particular values array to multicast out
to all the other processes. Now when I say multicast,
essentially the process pi, uh, goes through loops
through a for loop where it goes through all
the other processes in the system and sends them,
individually, a message, just a single,
point-to-point message. Since this is a synchronous
system, if the sending process and the receiving process
are both non-faulty, this message will be received before the end of the round. If any one of them is faulty, then the message
may not be received. And then finally,
after you do this, uh, f+1 times, after f+1 rounds, so i-so this
is one round, right, what I'm showing over here, and this is done for f+1 rounds at each of the processes, so each of the processes executing one execution of this, uh, for loop
in each of the rounds. So after you do this f+1 times, you simply look
at your values array, all the values that you
have received, and you can look
at the minimum value that you've received. This could either be the, uh,
minimum ID process who has sent you a value, or it could just be
the minimum value that you have received, and you set your
decision variable or your output variable
to be that minimum value. Now why does this work? This seems like
a very strange algorithm where everyone seems
to multicast their values to each other, and if different processes end up with different
values arrays at the end of the f+1 rounds, then they will end up
deciding different values. Well it turns out that
this protocol ensures that all the non-faulty processes
in the group, the ones that have not crashed, end up with the-
with identical values arrays at the end
of the, uh, f+1 rounds so that when they take
this minimum operation, they all end up
with the same decision value. Why is this true? Let's see the proof, uh,
for this. Uh, so once again the claim here
is that after f+1 rounds, all non-faulty processes
would have received the same set of values,
and so they will end up making the same decision using the minimum operation. Let's assume, uh,
that this is not true. Let's assume that two,
non-faulty processes, say pi and pj, differ in their
final set of values after f+1 rounds. Uh, assume,
without loss of generality, that pi possesses a value, v, that pj does not have. If the reverse is true,
that pj has a value v that pi does not have,
you just flip i and j and do the same proof. So pi must have received this
value v in the very last round, the f+1th round
of the protocol. Why? Well, if it
had received it earlier, in the fth round or before, then pi would have multicast the value in the f+1th round, and because pi did not fail
and pj did not fail, pj would have received
this value and would have had the value v. So essentially, uh,
pi got this value v in the very last round,
the f+1th round, um, and, um, uh, this means that some
of the process pk, say pk must have sent
the value, uh, v to pi but must have crashed
before sending the value v to pj, when it went
through the full loop, trying to send the value v
to all the processes in the group. So some process pk crashed
in the very last-that is, f+1th-round of the protocol. Now, you have a scenario where in the fth round
of the protocol, or the end of the fth round
of the protocol, uh, you have a process, uh,
pk, that received the value v but another process pi
that did not receive the value v. This is the last-but-one round,
or the fth round. Right? Um, or you can also
consider pk and pj as-as-as the slide, uh, shows. But essentially,
using this, once again, you can use the same argument
as we did for the f+1th round to show that, um-uh,
again there must have been some other process, say pk', that must have crashed
in that fth round, uh, as well. And using this sort
of reverse induction, uh, we can infer that
in each of those f+1 rounds, a unique process
must have crashed. However, this
is a contradiction, because this means that we have a total of f+1 crashes, uh, during the execution
of the protocol, but we assume that there are
at most f crashes in, uh, the protocol. In other words,
if you let f to be N, you run the protocol
for N+1 rounds, you will end up concluding
from this, uh, assumption that there are N+1 failures, which cannot be true in a group of N processes. This means that our original
assumption must be false, uh, that, um, after f+1 rounds,
um-uh, um-uh, two non-faulty processes differ in their final set of values, and so the converse
of that must be true, which is that all
the non-faulty processes end up with the same values
at the end of f+1 rounds, and so, with the minimum operation applied on the values' array,
they do decide the same, uh, values for their
decision variables. So that's the, uh,
consensus protocol that works in the synchronous system model
and also the proof for it. But what about
the asynchronous system model? Can we just go ahead
and solve it? Well, we'll see how
to do that in the next lecture