[MUSIC] In this lecture, we're going to look
at how election is done in a couple of popular systems in industry and
they are Google's Chubby system and the open source Apache Zookeeper system. Both of these systems use consensus or consensus-like approaches
to solve election. One approach to using
consensus to solve election is to have each process proposal value. Everyone in the group reaches
consensus on some process Pi's value. And then Pi is elected as a new leader. Whichever is the lucky process who's
value is chosen as the consensus value, in fact becomes the lucky
leader in the group. This is one approach this is not
necessarily the approach that these systems follow in industry. The systems in industry follow
Paxos like approaches for election. Paxos as you've seen elsewhere in the
course is a consensus solving protocol. It's guaranteed to be safe. Meaning that it it assures that never is a
case that different decisions are reached by different processes for
the consensus variable. But it's only eventually live, which means that it doesn't guarantee
that the protocol will ever terminate. Google's Chubby system uses
a Paxos-like approach and Apache Zookeeper also use,
uses a Paxos like approach. So let's look at Google Chubby first. Google Chubby is a system for locking. It is an essential part of Google's
internal stack of systems. Many of Google's storage systems,
such as BigTable and Megastore rely on Google Chubby for locking and for
writing small configuration files. Chubby maintains a small
group of replica servers. For instance, a cell, a Chubby cell
might contain five replica servers. Server A, B, C, D and E. And one of these servers is elected as
a master server at all points of time. So at any point of time, exactly one
of these servers must be the master or the leader and all the other servers in the group must
get to know about who the leader is. This is eventually our
leader election problem. All right.
So for instance in this case,
Server D is the master here. Now in order to make sure that
there is exactly one master and everyone knows who the master is,
an election protocol is required. Potential leader,
a server that wants to be a master or a leader,
tries to get votes from the other servers. Each server votes for at most, one leader. And when a potential leader gets
a majority of votes from the group, in this case, a majority would be three or more of the servers voting for you is
then that server becomes the new leader. When you have at least three votes from
the group, you can become the leader. So why is this road safe? Well, essentially every potential leader
is trying to reach a quorum in the system. And once again, this is an example of a
technique that you have seen elsewhere in the course that should,
should be familiar to you. Quorum is essentially a majority or
larger. Since any two quorums, no matter which
processes they contain are guaranteed to intersect in at least one process and each
process can vote for at most one leader. You cannot have the case that there
are multiple leaders elected by this election protocol. So this algorithm guarantees safety. Why is this algorithm live? Well, it's only eventually live because,
of course, you cannot solve consensus
in an asynchronous system. And so failures may keep happening,
so that no leader is ever elected. But if things were right
in the in the future, when messages are not delayed to much,
when not too many bad failures happen, then the protocol has a good chance
of converging and terminating. In fact, the folks at Google saw
elections typically take a few seconds, that's a typical time to run an election. And the worst case that was noticed
in the original paper written on Chubby by Google, I noticed that the worst
case election run took only 30 seconds. Chubby also uses a concept
known as leases. After an election finishes,
meaning a leader has been elected, the other servers, servers,
in the group, this group over here. Server A through E guaranteed that they
would not run another election for awhile. Okay.
So this while up time or this time duration is
called a master lease. This is the minimum amount of time that
the master is guaranteed to be the leader. Okay. This is particularly
said to be a few seconds. The master lease must be
renewed by the master, by simply getting a majority again. So as long as it's able to get a majority, it can continue to be the leader
without going through the overhead of running the entire leader
election protocol all over again. This technique of leases or
master leases also ensures that if the master fates renewal lease,
for instances, it has failed or has just began really slow,
then automatically the other servers start a new election run where a new master is
going to be elected with a new quorum. Next we're going to look at
election in Apache Zookeeper. Apache Zookeeper is an open source
system that is a centralized service for maintaining configuration information. Zookeeper uses a variant
of Paxos called Z-A-B or Zab, which stands for
Zookeeper Atomic Broadcast. Zookeeper needs to have
a leader elected at all times. The way lead election works in Zookeeper,
at least the way of electing leaders in Zookeeper is by having each server
create a new sequence number for itself. Let's call these sequence numbers as ids. Essentially, each server
does the following. It gets the highest-id so far. It fetches this from
the Zookeeper file system. Creates a next-higher id and it writes
this into the Zookeeper file system. At the end, whichever id remains, the process
that wrote it becomes the new leader. Okay.
So the highest-id service becomes the new leader. So this ensures that as long as
the files are written anatomically, so that files are written over completely and you don't have partial rights
from two different servers. You're insured that there's exactly one id
in that Zookeeper file at the end and so everyone knows who the leader
is by looking at that file and the leader also knows who
the leader is by at the file. Okay.
So for instance, N80 might be elected as the leader, because it has
the highest-id in the group. What about failures? Well, when you have failures,
such as the leader itself crashes. One option is for
everyone to monitor the correct master. For instance, by using a failure detector,
such as heart beating or ping-ponging. When there's a failure detected,
the processes initiate a new election run. However, when the master fails, multiple
other processes in the group might initiate elections simultaneously and
this may lead to a flood of messages. Even though you could use a way to
suppress the election messages so that most one of them completes, failure
does lead to an explosion of messages. So the option that is actually
implemented in Zookeeper involves each process monitoring its
next higher ID process. So N32, which is the second highest id
process in the system monitors N80. N32 itself is monitored by N12. N12 is monitored by N6 and
so on and so forth. And of course, N3 is monitored by N80,
so that you wrap around the ring. If a process has a successor that
is the current leader in the group, this would be N32, who's successor is N80. And if that process successor has failed, then N32 can immediately
become the new leader. So, it doesn't even need to
run a new election protocol. However, if your successor
is not the leader. For instance, N12 or N6,
then you need to wait for a time out and you need to check your successor again. So, if you timeout waiting for
your successor to respond, then you make sure that you then
point to your successor's successor. If you successor was the leader,
then you can become the new leader. Now conflicts may happen in the system,
because two different processes might write the same sequence number into
Zookeeper file and might turn out that both of them think that they're
the leader in the, in the group. The leader might, the leader might
also fail during the election run. To address both these issues, Zookeeper
uses a two phase commit protocol, which is run after the sequence id
protocol that we have discussed before. In this two-phase commit, the potential leader would seize its own
sequence number in the Zookeeper file. Sends a new leader message to
all the processes in the group. Each process that receives a new
leader message, waits for a while. It might receive new leader messages
from multiple prospective leaders. It responds back with at most, one ACK
message with at most, one board message. And sends it back to that potential
leader that has the highest process id. Now, what does the leader do? Well, the leader waits for a majority
of processes to send it back ACKs. If it reaches a majority,
then it knows that it is a leader. Because each process will
have ordered at most once and if it's got a majority,
if this leader has gotten a majority, then it's sure that no other potential
leader would have gotten a majority. This is the same idea as quorums or majorities that we have
seen as well in the course. Once a leader has its majority of ACKs,
it can then send a commit message to all saying that it is
the new confirmed leader. And everyone, everyone else on receiving
this commit message, update the leader or elected variable to be the new leader. Okay.
So this ensures that safety is still maintained, because once a leader has a
quorum, no one else can have a quorum and so it becomes the new leader. However, this may not guarantee liveness. It's possible that two potential leaders
that send out new leader messages simultaneously, maybe there are mo, more
than two leaders, suppose there are three leaders in the group that
are sending out new leader messages. Each of them gets about
a third of the works or a third of the ACKs from the group and
so now no one has a majority. No one has a 50% or
more of the ACKs in the group. And so liveness is not guaranteed here, you may need to read on the lead
election protocol again. However, safety is guaranteed,
because of the use of quorums. So that concludes our discussion of
election Google Chubby and an Zookeeper. And next we'll discuss in the next lecture
another classical algorithm called the Bully algorithm. [MUSIC]