So I wanted to take a detour
and give a little bit of history of how cloud computing
came about, to be. Cloud computing is not
the first distributed, uh, system in the wild, uh,
that has existed. Uh, there have been many,
uh, over the decades. In fact, the first few computers
that were built, including the very famous,
uh, ENIAC, and other computers such
as the ORDVAC and the ILLIAC, which were built in the 1940s. These were the first computers that were built
in the architecture, or similar architecture
as we know of today. They were in fact datacenters; they occupied entire, uh, large halls and entire large labs. So those were
in the 40s and the 50s. Then in the 1960s and 70s
there was an era of industry called timesharing
and data processing industry. This was an industry that took
large amounts of data large for that, uh,
those periods of time, those might have been
kilobytes or megabytes and process them
and then gave the outputs. Typically this, uh, input was given in the form
of punchcards, as well as the outputs
were spewed out in the form of, uh, punchcards. Then in the 1980s personal computers
became popular, and the data processing industry and timesharing
companies declined, but PCs also made it easier
to build clusters or networks of workstations,
and this lead to the evolution of other eras of computing
such as grid computing, and then
very large-scale systems such as peer-to-peer systems
in the 1990s and the 2000s. And only now have we been
coming back sort of full circle to the timesharing
and data processing industry by building
very large-scale clusters that process
very large amounts of, uh, data. And so clouds and data centers,
a lot of us argue, are in fact coming back
full circle to the 1960s and 70s,
except with a lot more scale and very different workloads than in the 1960s and 70s. So, uh, this is a very, uh,
crowded slide, obviously, and there's lot of detail
on this slide. Uh, I don't mean to go through
all the elements on the slide. One of the things
I want to point out is that the data
processing industry, uh, which is often called a precursor to this
cloud computing industry, was a fairly large industry, so if you look at
the numbers here, in 1960 the data processing
industry was $70 million. By 1970 it had become
$3.15 billion . Given the rates of inflation, uh, and how much
the dollar has inflated, this was a fairly large industry at that point of time. The players then
were very different from the players that we have today, in cloud computing. Uh, Honeywell, IBM
and a whole bunch of companies, including Xerox
were big players. That era also resulted
in several machines which are the precursor
for the architecture of many of our, uh, workstations and even servers, uh, today. This included
the, uh, DEC PDP-10, as well as the IBM 370, uh, which were very popular,
uh, at that time. The networks
and workstations which, uh, are built from PCs
or servers, uh, included the Berkeley Network
or Workstations project and also server farms, uh, at several companies, including at, uh, IBM. Uh, grids became fairly
popular in the 1980s. These were a way to connect
several sites together the sites being
not very large-scale, not as large-scale as
the datacenters, but being large enough,
and grids were born out of the Grid Physics
Network Project, also known as
the GriPhyN, uh, Project. The peer-to-peer systems
that were popular in the 1990s and continue to be popular today included, original systems
of Napster and Gnutella, which we'll be seeing later on in the course, uh, as well as BitTorrent,
which is, uh, um, still popular today. And all of these,
I argue, culminated in
today's cloud computing. All of the wisdom, as well as, all of the
technical infrastructure and the software protocols
that have been developed have culminated
and enabled us to develop, uh, the cloud stack
as we know it, today. So there are several trends, uh, that are well-known
in computer science. Uh, the, uh, most popular trend
is that, uh, um, uh, the CPU compute capacity doubles once about every 18 months. This is often known
as Moore's Law. It is also, um, uh, uh, true that storage doubles
once about every 12 months and bandwidth doubles
once about every 9 months. When I say "doubles"
I essentially, uh, mean that per dollar
you can buy twice the amount of capacity. So Moore's Law, which says that,
uh, the CPU compute capacity or at least,
the original version said that, CPU compute capacity doubled, uh, once every 18 months said that CPU,
uh, frequency doubled once every 18-
every 18 months, but that has hit a power wall, so nowadays,
what you will find is that the CPU speeds
don't increase anymore. Instead, CPUs grow horizontally. In other words, uh,
you find, uh, the number of CPUs that come out on motherboards that you can buy, of the market, is doubling once about
every 18, uh, months or so. But there are
significant differences as a result of this
exponential growth, um, in what was used
in the 1980s and 90s and what is typical today. Bandwidth, for instance, in 1985 consisted of mostly
56K links nationwide. Today, uh, our, uh, um, backbone links in the internet are much faster than this. Uh, this capacity, uh, today's, uh, PCs, workstations that you buy, or even laptops, uh, sometimes have
hundreds of gigabytes, in some cases terabytes,
and this is much more storage than a supercomputer
back in the 1990s. Not only the hardware
and the software, but also the user's
expectations have changed. Uh, biologists, for instance,
in 1990 were running, uh, small single-molecule simulations, but today they run, uh,
fairly large-scale, uh, genome sequencing experiments. Um, companies that
sequence your genome might run very large-scale jobs on a, uh, cloud. The, uh, Large Hadron Collider,
um, which is run by CERN, uh, and a variety of other, um, uh, uh, physics,
uh, and astronomy, uh, applications and setups, uh,
produce a lot of data per year. All this data
needs to be stored somewhere. It needs to be processed, a-and it is this storing
and processing that allows them to make
large discoveries such as, uh,
the discovery of the or the confirmation
of the Higgs boson, the confirmation
of the gravitational field, and a variety of other advances that have all occurred because of the ability
to store and process large amounts of data from, uh, these, uh, particle colliders. So one of the prophecies
that was, uh, made in the 1960s, uh, by Fernando Corbató
and other designers of this operating system
called Multics is that eventually, uh, the, um, computing would be available
as a utility, just like power is
available as a utility. Today we plug in our, uh, devices into the wall
and we get power, or you open the tap
and you get water. Uh, similarly
they envisioned that computing would be available
by just plugging and, uh, playing your client,
uh, into maybe an ethernet jack. So many have, uh, today said that cloud computing has in fact realized this vision. Others have said that we haven't yet
realized this vision; we have come very close to it. This is something for you
to think about, uh, not just now but also throughout the course as we go along. As an aside,
this Multics operating system that I mentioned here was one
of the precursors of, uh, today's Unix operating system. So Multics, for fair- was a fairly heavy-weight
and monolithic operating system, and at some point of time, uh,
a bunch of scientists sat down and said "Let's pare it down
to its minimal, uh, basics and build a smaller,
faster operating system." That operating system
was the Unix, uh, operating system,
which is of course the precursor for many of the popular operating systems today, including, uh, the, uh,
versions of Linux such as Ubuntu, Red Hat,
and so on and so forth. [electronic music]