[SOUND] [MUSIC] Well we're in the National Petascale
Computing Facility on the campus of the University of
Illinois. This is a facility that houses one of the
worlds most powerful computers. Not just for computation, but also for
data analysis. So it's unique in the sense of it's the
most intense data analysis system. As well as being one of the most highly parallel computers in the world
doing projects. For science and engineering and other types of scholarly work for the nation's
scientists. This is the twentieth super computer that
I've been involved with making work. I worked at Berkeley laboratory. I was the general manager of a, a system called NERSC, the National Energy Research
Scientific Computing Facility. And we had a number of supercomputers in,
in in NERSK. Before that, I worked at NASA/AMES.
Again making very large systems work. So when I heard of the Blue Waters project
I thought it was the best possible thing going on in
high-performance computing. And it was changing the way people were
thinking about these computers. It was converting from this idea, well we'll just worry about the peak
performance of the system and assume that I can make
use of all that, that power. Turns out that that's not the case, that
if you have to focus on what real work comes
out of the system rather than some theoretical
number And that was the entire philosophy of the Blue
Waters Project. To get real science work done at a scale
never before seen. Faster than anybody else could do it. And I thought that was great. Because that's really what motivates
people for, for helping do this.
What science impact is there. So I came and talked to some colleagues here, and eventually we worked out the
fact that I came from California, the Bay area, to
Illinois about five years ago, to make Blue Waters
work. And I've enjoyed it very much since then,
Illinois a great place. Well, we have about 60 projects that use
this system. And those projects are, come on to the system after stringent peer review by
different agency's. The largest amount of time is controlled
by the National Science Foundation. And they have about 35 research teams from
around the nation working on a variety of, a large variety of different areas.
So there are people that are doing astrophysics, how do how did the
universe form? How did galaxies form? What happens when galaxies collide? Another example is a recently announced
result, one of the first really ground breaking results
from the system. Because we've only been running it in
service now for about six months, and that result is how the AIDS virus infects a cell. And this is the first time such a high
resolution complex simulation has been done, and that was in the cover
of Nature at in May. Another example is climate studies, severe
weather in terms of what happens, what's going to happen
with our climate. But, at resolutions that have never been done before.
Resolutions where actually clouds form. [COUGH] At first principles rather then estimating how they form kilometer
resolutions. For the severe weather calculations they
are down to ten meters so that they can actually predict things like tornadoes
or gusts of wind in, in hurricanes. The system was used to run the biggest simulation ever of a
hurricane, Hurricane Sandy. And how that was different then other
different from other hurricanes, how the tracking was different, and why it
went the way it went. We are also doing a lot of chemistry
applications, material science, and some other things like how
does disease spread. Other biomedical applications as well. Well, it's the largest system that Cray
has ever built. It's about 50% larger than the next largest systems, which happens to be at
Oak Ridge National Lab in terms of size,
number of cabinets, the scale of all the
components. It is a system that has tremendous
processing power. We term that power in terms of sustained
performance, the time it takes to solve problems. And our mission here is to shrink the time
it takes to solve problems by a variety of science and engineering teams into
something that used to take years or decades in two months, or
even, sometimes, weeks. So these are problems that cannot be done
elsewhere. They're bigger than has ever been done before. They're more complex than has been done
before. So that's our job, that's why this system
is here at the university, serving the nation as a
national resource. It also has more memory than any other
system I know of in the world 1.7 petabytes of memory that all can be
accessed simultaneously [COUGH] by any of this,
the, the nodes. It has, the most intense data system not only
because of the size of the data system but also because
of the bandwidth. The amount of data that can move back and
forth from the parts of the, the system, the compute nodes, to
online disk, and then the online storage. So it has almost a half of an exabyte of
storage capacity in the system as well. And surrounding all that is one of the most highly
connected systems in the world with 100s of gigabits of networking bandwidths
coming from or leaving this facility, going to places in Chicago, and then being
connected throughout the entire world. So what we have here is the arrogation of
many, many components together that are designed all
to operate for single programs. So but they're really made of the same
components that are in your, your cell phones, or your
laptop computers. As a matter of fact it's almost a fractal
type relationship. Because while in your laptop computer you
have a processor that may have two or four cores in it.
We have processors, 288 racks of processors, that we use as a
computational unit. They have about 800,000 cores. That all operate simultaneously on the
same applications. We have the interconnects that go between
all those processors, so they all can communicate
with each other. They all can coordinate the work. And they're put together then with
linkages to our hard disk storage system, our rotating disk storage system.
That's about 36 petabytes of storage, as opposed to one or two terabytes that you
might have in your local machines. And then we have more storage that's near
by. It would be the equivelant of you plugging
in a USB drive as a secondary drive. We call that Near Line Storage, and that's about 500 petabytes, almost half an
exabyte of capacity. All connected together with a network, the
same as you do on your cell phone, or your other appliances, and to do that, you also need things like power supplies, like
cooling. So if you think of the chip in your, your
local computer it has a heat sync on it, you
have a fan. Well, we have a tremendous amount of
infrastructure to cool the heat coming off of this machine because it
produces it loses a lot of energy to do all these calculations as
fast as it does. We also have a tremendous infrastructure
for the power that comes into the building and then is distributed, very
efficiently, to all the devices here. So in one way it is just a much, much
bigger, combination of the equipment that you would have, but you have to be able to program it so it all operates
simultaneously on a single application. Which means that there's been a lot of
communication that goes on between the cores, between the processors,
in order to do these simulations. So what we have is very, very tightly coupled communication across hundreds of
thousands of cores. And that's how the programs are written on this system with some specialized
communication protocols. And this all happens very, very quickly. So that we can make progress and be very
efficient.