[MUSIC] Welcome back to all the students
interested in learning more about Cloud Computing Concepts. This is Cloud Computing Concepts part two. In this course, just like the first
part of the Cloud Computing Concepts, remains about internals of cloud computing
which means distributed systems. And display the algorithms that underlie
today's cloud computing technologies. What underlies the hood is what
we are going to focusing on in the second part as well. We'll discuss concepts, and techniques and applications of these two industry
systems, as well as open-source systems. The second part of C3 Cloud Computing
Concepts course builds on the part one. C3 part one is a prerequisite for,
part two. We will be reusing and relying on many of
the concepts we have learned in part one, throughout part two for the homework, for the material that we discuss, as well as
for the optional programming assignment. So what are we going to cover in C3,
part two? We'll continue our discussion
where we left off in part one, and focus on more classical algorithms
including leader election, mutual exclusion, and scheduling, all of which are used in pretty much all
of the cloud computing systems today. We look at it a discussion of scalability. How do you support millions of
clients with concurrency control, and hundreds of servers, and
replicas with replication control? We'll look at new trending areas
such as real time stream processing, distributed graph processing, and
also, wisdom in structure of networks, as well as new areas like sensor networks. And finally, we'll discuss areas related
to cloud computing such as distributed file systems,
distributed shared memory, security. And we'll see case studies of what happens
when things go wrong in data centers. And we'll continue interviews with our
friends in Industria as well as Academia. What we'll be relying on from C3 part one
includes classical precursors, information about the widely used algorithms and
classical algorithms that underlie cloud computing systems, things that you've
already learned in part one, as well as knowledge about map reduce and key value
stores that you have seen in part one. Just like part one, here in part two,
as well, we're going to have homeworks. Here, we'll have weekly homeworks. In addition, you'll be doing a programming
assignment, and it's in C++. In addition, you'll be doing a programming
assignment, and it's in C++. In this programming assignment, you're
going to be implementing a fault-tolerant key-value store inside an emulator
that emulates a distributed system. This builds on the programming assignment
from the Cloud Computing Concepts, part one. So I highly encourage students who
have not taken part one yet to go and, take a look and even try out
the programming assignment from part one. And of course, at the end of the course,
there's going to be one final exam. >> Cloud computing continues to be
an exciting area, one that is dynamic and continuously changing. And I hope you will continue this
journey with me as we complete our tour through the cloud computing concepts,
landscape.