So today we come back to, uh,
one of the issues that we raised in the first lecture in the series which is, uh,
that Clouds are money savers. Are they really all the time? So once again,
just to remind you, uh, when you want to start up your own, uh, service or company you have a couple of options. Either you could use
an existing public Cloud, we have mentioned several
of these names, or you could, um, buy and use
your own private Cloud. Uh, there is a difference
between these, essentially when you use
a public Cloud you're paying, uh,
for CPU hours you use, gigabytes months that you
store but you're not paying for, uh, power for cooling, for,
ah, management costs and so on and so forth. You would be paying those if
you buy your own private Cloud. So the question we raise is,
uh, should you outsource or should you
own your own Cloud? So in order to do this essentially we have to do
a cost calculation so let's do a sample cost
calculation for a sample uh, medium-scale data center that, uh, we bought recently
at Illinois a few years ago, but at least that means that we have the
hardware numbers for it. Uh, this data center was called the Cloud Computing Test Bed
or the CCT. It had a 128 servers,
housed 24 total cores, with 8 cores per server and a little over
500 terabytes of data. Let's assume
that the new company that you are going to run requires exactly
that much amount of, uh, CPU and storage resources, okay? So that's the typical
storage resources that you'd need
to run all the time. So if you outsource and we use
AWS costs here from 2009, uh, then, uh, to store,
uh, uh, 524 terabytes using 12 cents
per gigabyte month, the cost from 2009, um, uh, and we use, uh, the EC2 costs of 10 cents per CPU hour, the storage costs comes
to be about, uh, $62,000. If you add the storage
and CPU costs it comes out
to be about $136,000. So that's the grand total per
month that you'd be paying to AWS in order to run a service
of, uh, this given size. On the other hand if you own,
buy your own private Cloud, uh, then we can take the numbers
from the invoice, uh, the storage total cost was
$349, uh, thousand. And since your service is only
going to run for M months, M is a variable here,
the per month cost is, uh, $349K divided by M. The total cost is $1555K
divided by M that's the total cost here, uh, plus you need to also be paying
for, uh, uh, sysadmin, uh, and this uses an industry
rule of thumb, which says that for a small sca- for a medium scale data center
with a 100 s- with a few hundreds of servers you need one sysadmin
per 100 nodes. And since it's
about 128 servers, uh, we just one sysadmin and use, uh, the, um, uh,
the, uh, monthly rate, uh, that is required for
just, uh, the CCT services. The-the quote out here $1555K also includes, uh, the numbers for, uh, the power
and the network so we-what we did
is we used the invoice number, which of course I can't put out,
uh, uh, in public but I used the invoice numbers along with, uh, the, um, uh, uh, uh, industry rule of thumb which says that if you pay
45 cents for hardware you need to pay 40 cents for power and 15 cents for network amortized over-out
over three years of, uh, lifetime
of the hardware, so using
that we get these numbers. So essentially now it becomes
a comparison of costs right? So, uh, the breakdown analysis
essentially says that it is more preferable
to own rather than outsource if the cost of owning is less than the cost of outsourcing on a per monthly basis. So for storage this says
that it is $39K divided by M less than $62K. And you can use this
to solve for M and it turns out to be M
greater than 5.55 months. Essentially this means
that if you loo- if you focus only on storage, if your service is going
to be running for fewer than 5.55 months then you want to be outsourcing
and using a public Cloud. If it's going
to be running for longer then you want to be using, uh, un, uh, perhaps your
own private Cloud because it's
more cost effective. Overall the calculation says that the cost of, um,
owning is less than the cost of, uh, outsourcing
and that is, uh, true if you solve for M here, you find that M is greater than
12 months, uh, for the overall. Again this means that
if you think your service is going to last
for more than a year, then it's, uh, more, uh, cost effective for you to buy your own private, uh,
data center, but if it's, uh,
less than 12 months then, uh, essentially you may want to outsource and use a public Cloud. This explains
why startup companies, which are not really sure
how long they want to last and, uh, also not sure
of how much competition and, uh, storage
resources they are going to use prefer to outsource
and use public Clouds in their first few months and even their first few years. And later on when the, uh, when
it congeals they might move to buying
their own private Cloud, on the other hand they might not because they've already built
an infrastructure on a well known public Cloud
and it works and, uh, customers and, uh, users
are already going there so they may not want
to change it. Uh, so AW- so, uh, you know, um, uh, companies like AWS and Microsoft, NetZero and, uh, Google Computing
engineered these services, uh, they essentially, uh, are
able to, uh, benefit from you building the stack on those,
uh, software infrastructures and then sticking with them. Also these, uh, Cloud providers
benefit a lot, uh, from storage, as you noticed, uh, the break
even point for storage is much smaller
than the break even point for, uh, for, uh, for the overall, uh, cost and this means
that, um, the, uh, storage is benefiting the Cloud
providers the most but essentially
you're storing data there and it is just sitting there
even though it may not be used you'd be in the you-you'd be paying per gigabyte month. So I want to wrap up
our discussion of the introduction
to the Cloud Computing. Cloud, um, Computing is not, um, has not, uh, been bought
out of the blue it is, uh, a culmination
of many previous generations of distributed systems and it builds on the technical knowledge as well the wisdom of these previous generations. Uh...it is a coming back to full
circle of the timesharing and data processing industry that existed
in the 1960s and 70s except with more scale,
different kinds of workloads and many, many more
users and customers. When someone gives you a problem
that is, uh, that they say is a Cloud Computing problem,
essentially we check whether the problem has
one or more of these traits; large scale, on-demand access, data intensive nature or involved
new programming paradigms. If it does not have
any of these, ah, ah, aspects then it may not be a new problem it may be
an already solved problem with well known solutions. If it has one of these aspects, uh, at least one
of these aspects then it may be a new problem and, um, uh, perhaps
there is a new solution or the- perhaps you can build
a new solution to it. So it's important for us to, um,
check Cloud Computing problems against these,
uh, four criteria.