So let's continue discussing, uh, the, uh, new aspects
of clouds. We've distinguished them
from previous generations of distributed
computing systems. We discussed massive scale
in the last, uh, lecture. Today, we move onto
the second aspect, which is the on demand access, uh, and we'll discuss here
as part of this the aaS classification
that is popular industry. So on demand access
basically means that you pay for exactly what you use rather than paying
an upfront cost or buying something upfront. This is sort of like, um, uh, renting a cab versus
what used to be previously, uh, renting a car, where,
uh, you might have to, uh, pay some upfront cost
for using ba- to use servers that others own, or buying a-a-a car which essentially is analogous- analogous to, uh,
buying your own, uh, datacenter. Instead, today's, uh,
services allow you to, uh, pay a few cents
to a few dollars, uh, per CPU hour, and you can use
as many CPUs as you want, as your application needs. For instance,
this is what AWS, uh, EC2, as well as Microsoft Azure provide for you. Or you can pay a few cents
to a few dollars per gigabyte month
that you store. Once again, AWS and Azure
provide these services for you, and there's a variety
of other companies providing similar services
for you at competitive rates. Now in industry
there's often classification of the cloud services
that are provided, uh, based on, uh, the nature
of the services themselves. These are often classified as, um, an aaS classification,
or "as a Service." So HaaS stands for
"hardware as a service." Essentially this means that you get access to
the bare bones hardware machines and you can do whatever you want with them. For instance, if you buy
your own cluster, your own private cloud, then, uh, you're running
a hardware as a service. Uh, but exposing hardware as a service
to other users, especially those that
you don't trust, may not be a good idea because of the security risks involved, uh, with giving, uh,
root access, uh, on your machines
to untrusted users. Infrastructure as a service
allows you to get, m, access, uh, to machines, uh, and,
uh, install your own, uh, operating systems and machines, but without having the security, uh, uh, holds
of the hardware as a service. Essentially, uh, this uses
virtualization so that, uh, you can spawn up
your own VMs and instances, and essentially AWS, uh, Microsoft Azure, uh, and a variety of other players, uh, offer services
that are infructure- infrastructure as a service, and this is one
of the most popular ways of using public clouds,
uh, today. Oftentimes this is said
to subsume, uh, HaS, uh. The, uh, knowledge
of these terms in industry is not uniform; there are conflicting definitions, but, uh, you might often hear that IaaS, uh, subsumes hardware as a service. There are two other
classifications. Platform as a service essentially is, uh, uh, a more of a tightly congealed or, um, um, o-or consolidated service form of IaaS. You don't get access to VMs
but you write your, uh, your, uh, your code, and it's tightly integrated
with the software platform. For instance, Google's AppEngine
allows you to write code in Python, Java or Go, and then it autoscales out your, uh, your, uh, application depending on
the incoming load, but you don't necessarily
think about VMs at, uh, that point in time, and you don't necessarily
need to think about, um, um, installing VMs
or provisioning VMs. A lot of the provisioning
is done for you. So it's easier,
but it's less flexible than, uh, than IaaS. Uh, Finally,
a software as a service, and essentially this gives you access
to software services when you need them,
and again you pay on demand. Uh, this includes Google docs, which I'm sure a lot
of you have used, and also Microsoft Office
on demand and many others, uh, that are out there. Uh, service
oriented architectures, which have been popular
for many decades, are often, uh, said to be subsumed under
the software as a service, so SaaS a-as a definition
is a little bit broader than what I have talked about
on this slide because it also includes
the SOA architectures. The third aspect
that is new in cloud, uh, clouds today
that distinguishes it from previous generations
of distributed systems is that we are dealing
with large amounts of data. And so previously, while, uh, there was computation intensive computing, for instance, uh,
the message passing interface, or MPI based computing, and high performance computing, where you would have a relatively
small amount of data but you'd run fairly intense computations on it, for instance, weather modeling is a computation intensive, uh, uh, computation,
uh, and this includes of course, uh, datacenters such as
NCSA Blue Waters, but data- but data intensive computing
is sort of the reverse, where you have large amounts
of data that are stored in datacenters, and you need to use
compute nodes that are nearby, just because you're dealing with ex- enormous amounts of data, petabytes or terabytes
or exabytes, um, and these computation runs n-, uh, nodes run computation services that
allow you to process the data. So the shift in
computation intensive, uh, computing toward
data intensive computing is a shift away from, uh, computation to the data. You need to pay
more attention to the data; you need to bring compute cycles closer to the data. And then when you look
at the servers themselves, CPU utilization,
which used to be the main metric for measuring,
uh, resource utilization in computation intensive,
uh, clouds, is no longer
the most important metric. Instead, uh, I/O is. This includes, um, uh,
disk I/O and also network I/O. Oftentimes in datacenters
you will find that the disk or the network I/O is
close to being maximized out, while in computation
intensive clouds, uh, the CPU utilization
is going to be fairly high. Once again, this is not
a hard and fast rule. After all, data centers
are just, uh, uh, very super large, uh, clusters, and so,
you can use them to run both computation intensive, uh, jobs
as well as data intensive jobs. Finally you have new pra-
cloud programing paradigms. This includes, uh, ways, uh, in which you can
process the data, which tend to be the bulk of new cloud programing paradigms, and also ways in which
you can store and query the data,
fairly quickly. Google include, uh, uh,
in-induced, uh, in-, um, uh, introduced MapReduce as well as other engines like Sawzall, uh, and these were open sourced, uh, uh, um, or rather open source versions
were written of these, uh, by, uh, Yahoo,
that became Hadoop. It was later open-
unopen sourced, and it is now an Apache,
uh, project. It is also then spun off
as a separate company by Yahoo, uh, as of, uh, this date. MapReduce itself was offered as an elastic MapReduce service
on Amazon, again, as you pay as you go,
uh, as you process your data, and MapReduce is useful for processing very large amounts
of data. For instance, uh, companies, uh, use it, uh, to, uh, uh, process a lot of the data
that is part of their core, uh, mission. So for instance, Google, of course Google is known
for its search engine, but in order to, uh, provide results to you in the search engine, th-they need to index the,
uh, data, the websites, that are crawled
by their crawlers. This indexing, uh, in 2006 was done by a chain of
24 MapReduce jobs. Uh, it, uh, processed about
50 petabytes per month and was using
200,000 MapReduce jobs. Yahoo similarly has
a web map application which is a chain
of 100 MapReduce jobs, uh, process- it processed
280 terabytes of data in 73 hours
when you use 2500 nodes. There's also
another engine there called Pig, uh, which is, uh, uh,
developed on top of Hadoop. Facebook uses Hadoop as well
as another engine called Hive, developed on top of, uh, Hadoop, uh, and once again
they were processing, uh, 55 terabytes per day, uh, and adding 2 terabytes per day
back in 2008. There's a variety
of other companies that use MapReduce to process, uh, their, um, their, uh, data sets
and the daily logs, including companies like
eHarmony.com, which actually use it
to do overnight runs where they match, uh,
dates with each other. Essentially,
that's a MapReduce job. So that's computation. There's also new
cloud programing paradigms where you can store
and query data fairly quickly. MySQL is an industry standard, but, uh, NoSQL
and Key Value Store systems, which are the new
cloud storage systems, are, uh, many orders
of magnitude faster, and you'll see why as we go along later on, in the course. [electronic music]