Updated on 9/13: Added clarifications to Q1b, Q2e, Q4, and Mapreduce instructions

                     CS425 Fall 2026 – Homework 1
                     (a.k.a. “Sports Smorgasbord!”)
      Out: Aug 27, 2026. Due: Sep 20, 2026 (Sunday, 11:59 pm US Central)
      Topics: Clouds, MapReduce, Gossip, Failure detectors, Grids (Lectures 1-5)

Instructions:

   1.​ Please double-check that the top of this page mentions the correct semester you
       are taking the course in (otherwise, you are looking at an old version and we will
       not accept your submitted solutions).
   2.​ Attempt any 8 out of the 10 problems in this homework. If you attempt more,
       we will grade only the first 8 solutions that appear in your homework. Each
       problem has the same grade value (10 points each).
   3.​ Your solutions must be typed and not handwritten. Figures (e.g., timelines) and
       equations (if any) may be hand-drawn (and scanned).
   4.​ Submit PDF only. Start each problem on a fresh page.
   5.​ Please submit on Gradescope. [https://www.gradescope.com/] Self-signup
       using the code on the website.
   6.​ Very important: On Gradescope, please tag each page with the problem
       number!
   7.​ Homework is due on the date and time noted above. No extensions.
       For DRES students only: once the solutions are posted (typically a few hours
       after the HW is due), subsequent submissions will get a zero.
   8.​ Always justify all your answers, and show your working.
   9.​ Unless otherwise specified in the question, the only resources you can avail of in
       your HW are the provided course materials (slides, textbooks, etc.) and
       communication with instructors/TA via the discussion forum.
   10.​You can discuss lecture concepts and the questions on Piazza and with your
       friends, but do not discuss solutions or ideas on Piazza.

Prologue: As we gear up for various sports events in 2026, various teams rely on
distributed and cloud computing systems to improve their performance and chance of
medaling. The choice and frequency of occurrence of team or player names is arbitrary.
Any resemblance to persons, places, or events, living or dead, past, present, or future, is
coincidental. These stories are not intended to take sides with or against any team or

                                                                                         1

sportsperson, and do not support, endorse, criticize, or disparage any team or
sportsperson.

Problems:

   1.​ To continue their winning ways in international competitions, the US Relay
       teams plan to build a system for gossiping tips for efficient passing of the baton.
       They analyze the “topology-aware gossip” protocol from the lecture. We have
       two subnets, each with N/2 processes (nodes), that are connected via one root
       process (aka root node); so a total of N+1 processes/nodes. All nodes have a full
       membership list, and there are no failures (messages or nodes). Let’s call the
       subnets A and B. Each node knows whether it is the root, or if it belongs to A or
       B. The topology-aware push gossip works as follows. Any node that is not the
       root picks a gossip target within its own subnet with probability (1 - 2/N), and it
       picks the root node as the gossip target with probability (2/N). The root node
       picks a gossip target randomly from the N nodes with uniform probability. All
       nodes use the same gossip period; each node picks one gossip target per round,
       and the rounds are synchronized. Only push gossip is used. Calculate the
       following:
           a.​ O( ) average dissemination time for a gossip with one sender from any
               subtree (note the root is not the sender), as a function of N.
           b.​ Maximum (across all nodes) of the average load on the any single node.

   2.​ (You may use the web to research this question, but you should not cut and paste
       text. Use your own words, but fewer than 50 words per part.) The WNBA Dallas
       Wings and the NBA LA Lakers teams can’t seem to win nowadays despite
       multi-million dollar player salaries. They want to use AWS to analyze their
       games. But neither team knows much about cloud computing! Can you help
       them?
           a.​ What is the key difference between AWS Lambda and AWS EC2?
           b.​ What are the two key differences between AWS Lambda and AWS spot
               instances (think: pricing and how long instances last)?
           c.​ What is the key difference between a “regular” AWS instance (EC2) and a
               “burstable” AWS instance?
           d.​ What is the difference between a GPU and a TPU (among cloud
               offerings)?
           e.​ What is the difference between AWS spot instances and Google Cloud
               preemptible instances (or the recent Google Cloud spot instances)?

                                                                                        2

       f.​ Give one example application (class) where you would prefer AWS EC2,
           and one where you would prefer AWS Lambda. Justify your choices
           briefly.

3.​ (You may use the web to research this question, but you should not cut and paste
    text. Use your own words.) The US fencing team wants to contain their next
    opponents and send them to the cloud, so naturally they start looking at
    containers. They spend their free time researching the topic, and they come
    across the following terms: Container, Docker, Virtual Machine (VM), Kubernetes
    (K8s), K8s Pod, K8s cluster. Help them please!
        a.​ Define each of these 6 terms concisely (1 sentence per term).
        b.​ Among the four possibilities of docker, container, VM, and K8s, give one
            scenario where the fencing team would use each of them over the other
            three possibilities. Think of applications. (Keep your answer to < 100
            words).
        c.​ Give two key differences between a K8s node, K8s pod, and K8s cluster.

4.​ Drone fireworks are becoming an eco-friendly alternative. They require cloud
    computing to plan the drone paths! Someone tells you that the MapReduce job
    for the drone-based fireworks for the upcoming LA 2028 Olympics closing
    ceremony show will use a total of 300 Map tasks, 200 Reduce tasks, and run
    across a cluster of 20 machines. Under YARN, each machine has 5 containers.
    Since fireworks are time-critical, this is the only MapReduce job running in the
    entire cluster. Each Map task takes exactly 20 seconds to execute (this includes
    time to fetch its input, but not shuffle time), and generates exactly 25 MB of
    output data. The total bandwidth of the network is 2.5 Gbps. The partitioning
    function is such that each Reduce task fetches an equal amount of data from each
    Map task. There is a barrier between when all the Map tasks finish their
    computation, and the start of the shuffle traffic transfer from any of the Map tasks
    (remember from lecture where the Map output is stored). The Reduce task
    execution time is 35 seconds (includes time to write output to 3-way replicated
    HDFS, but does not include shuffle traffic time to fetch its input). When
    calculating time to shuffle the intermediate data from map tasks to a reduce task,
    ignore local-disk read/write time and local sorting/local partitioning/CPU
    overhead; assume that the network transfer dominates. Calculate the total time
    for the MapReduce job to finish.

5.​ The failing US men’s 4X100m Olympic medley swimming relay team, which lost
    its Gold Medal in the Paris 2024 Olympics after a 64 year unbeaten streak, wants
    to improve its performance. It wants to build a failure detector for an

                                                                                      3

   asynchronous system of N processes (N very large). Their failure detection
   protocol works as follows: Assume there are N=M*K*R processes in the system
   (M, K, R, are integers, each > 2). Arrange these N processes in an M×K×R
   3-dimensional matrix (tesseract), with M processes in each column, K processes
   in each row, and R processes in the 3rd dimension (aisles). All processes maintain
   a full membership list; however, pinging is partial. Each process uses a subset of
   its membership list as its monitoring set. The monitoring set of Pijk (in the i-th row
   and j-th column and k-th aisle) contains: (i) all other processes in its own row P*jk ,
   (ii) all other processes in its own column Pi*k , and (iii) all other processes in its
   own aisle Pij* . We have two options: Option 1 – Each process sends heartbeats to
   its monitoring set members. Option 2 – Each process pings all its monitoring set
   members; pings are responded to by acks, just like in the SWIM protocol (but
   there are no indirect pings or indirect acks or suspicions). Failure detection
   timeouts work as usual: Option 1 uses a heartbeat receiver timeout waiting for a
   heartbeat, while in Option 2 the pinging process times out. A suspected process
   is immediately marked as failed. This is run as an asynchronous distributed
   system.
        a.​ How many failures does it take to violate completeness in Option 1? That
            is, find the value L so that if there are (L-1) simultaneous failures, all of
            them will be detected, but if there are L simultaneous failures then not all
            of them may be detected.
        b.​ Answer the above question for Option 2.
        c.​ The Jamaican relay team (Oh yeah, that’s the main competition!) claims
            this algorithm satisfies accuracy for S simultaneous failures or fewer, for
            both Option 1 and Option 2. Find the value of S (as a function of K, M, R,
            and N).

6.​ To train new sportspersons, US sports agencies have been wondering whether it
    is faster to “push” gossip about new coaching opportunities or to have the young
    sportspersons “pull” gossip about them. Someone argues, “Push gossip is slow.
    It is better to do pull gossip, and even with fixed fanout, it converges in
    O(log(log(N)) time!” Are they right? If yes, give a proof (informal proof ok). If
    they are wrong, give a proof (informal proof). (Note: Push gossip and pull gossip
    mentioned here are the same protocols discussed in lecture)

7.​ The US has a cricket team! Since their main player is an engineer, the US cricket
    team designed a failure detector but to “make it faster” to find injuries among
    players. They have experimented with various failure detectors they learnt in
    class, but they have made a few tweaks. For each of these changes (in isolation),

                                                                                        4

   say what the one biggest advantage and the one biggest disadvantage of the
   change is (and why). Keep each answer to under 50 words (give brief
   justifications).
       a.​ They use Gossip-style failure detection, but they set Tcleanup = 0.
       b.​ They use SWIM-style failure detection, but they removed the Suspicion
           feature.
       c.​ They use SWIM-style failure detection, but they removed the round-robin
           pinging + random permutation, and instead just randomly selected each
           ping target.

           You must read these instructions before you solve problems 8–10
    For all MapReduce questions, please use the lecture definition/template for
    MapReduce jobs, i.e., Map/Reduce tasks/functions, and not other sources
    from the Web, since there are many different variants on the Web!
       You should have at least some parallelism. You can set your key and value
    to arbitrary objects.
       Please ensure that a Map stage reads data from only one input dataset (i.e., if
    a Map reads directly from D2, don’t use it to also read from D1. And
    vice-versa.) – this is consistent with good MR practices. Instead, use two
    separate MapReduce jobs, one for each dataset; a third MapReduce job can
    then read the outputs together, since multiple input files can be specified for a
    single job. You cannot retain data on any of the machines from a task (Map or
    Reduce) for use in a later task. Each MapReduce in a chain can read the
    dataset, but there is no other persistent memory across the chain.
        Chaining MapReduces is allowed, as long as you don’t over-use chaining
    (where parallelization could have helped instead).
       Pseudocode should be unambiguous, and it can be coarse-grained, e.g., you
    can say “get top k from this list by field x”, “sort this list by key x”, etc. Be clear
    and concise, and don’t miss any steps.
    The lecture slides have four further exercises. Please look through them
    (https://courses.grainger.illinois.edu/cs425/fa2026/L3.FA26.pdf, pages #39–)

8.​ You are an intern at the NBA and WNBA. Their presidents give you a dataset D
    containing information from an asymmetrical social network. Each line in D is a
    pair (a,b) which means user a follows user b. Write a MapReduce program (Map
    and Reduce separately) that outputs the list of all users X who satisfy the
    following FOUR conditions simultaneously: i) user X has at least 10 million
    followers, and ii) X follows fewer than 10 other users, and iii) all the users that X

                                                                                              5

   follows also follow X back, and iv) X does NOT follow the unique user u, where
   u is the user who has the highest number of followers of any user in the entire
   dataset D (you are told there is only one such unique user u, though you are not
   told who u is). Ensure that your output does not contain duplicates.
   Hint: This question is an ”extended” version of one of the exercise problems in
   the lecture slides.

9.​ The US Tennis Association would like to analyze why their players are giants on
    social media but don’t seem to win anywhere near as many majors as Martina
    Navratilova, Chris Evert, or Pete Sampras did. They want to use MapReduce to
    analyze this.
    You are given three datasets.
        ●​ D1 – Post Log: log of all the posts on a social network over several weeks.
           Each line contains tuples (a, p, ts), where a is a user ID, p is the post ID,
           and ts is the timestamp of the post p made by the user. If a user has
           multiple posts, they will appear as separate entries. The entries are not
           sorted in any order. You can assume post IDs (p) are unique globally (each
           appears exactly once in the log).
        ●​ D2 – “Like Log”: log of a social network that captures likes on the social
           network. Each line contains a pair (a, p, ts) indicating user a liked post
           with post ID p at time ts. There are no duplicate pairs containing the same
           (a,p,*) pair (i.e., each user likes a post at most once).
        ●​ D3 – a (large) list of user IDs of current US tennis players.
    Write a MapReduce program to find the top K posters (user IDs) from D3 who get
    the most likes from posts they post. Your output should be a file with K lines in it,
    each line containing a user ID. Outputs should not contain duplicates.

10.​(You may use the web to read more about BPE, but not the MapReduce-related part of the
    question.) Byte Pair Encoding (BPE) is a technique used to construct a vocabulary
    of tokens from a large text corpus. Suppose you have been tasked with writing a
    MapReduce program to train a BPE tokenizer using the following simplified
    version:
    Assume that each line of input is one sentence in the corpus (you do not need to
    merge pairs across sentence boundaries). The input corpus is stored in HDFS.
    The initial vocabulary is the individual characters found in the text. You can
    assume each input sentence has already been split into a sequence of initial
    tokens based on the initial vocabulary. For example, the word "low" already
    appears as: l o w in the input text.
    BPE training then proceeds for K iterations. In each iteration:

                                                                                        6

1. Count the frequency of every adjacent token pair in the corpus.
      For example, in the token sequence:
        low_low
      the adjacent pairs are (l,o), (o,w), (w,_), (_,l), (l,o), (o,w).
2. Find the globally most frequent adjacent token pair. If there is a tie, break ties
lexicographically.
3. Create a new token in the vocabulary by merging that pair (otherwise referred to
as creating a merge rule). For example, if (l,o) is the most frequent pair, you will
create a new token "lo" and add it to the vocabulary.
4. Finally, rewrite the corpus by replacing every occurrence of that most frequent
adjacent pair with the newly created token. In the above example, the sequence
low_low
becomes
lo w _ lo w

After K iterations, the trainer will output (i) trained vocabulary: the initial
vocabulary together with all new tokens created during the K iterations (ii) the
final merged corpus.

 Write a chained MapReduce program to train this BPE tokenizer.
  a.​ Describe the Map and Reduce functions for the MapReduce job(s)
      required to implement one BPE iteration. Assume a tokenized corpus at
      the beginning of an iteration; explain how you count adjacent token-pair
      frequencies, find the globally most frequent pair to create the new token,
      and rewrite the corpus with the newly created token to produce the input
      corpus for the next iteration.
  b.​ Give an intuition of how you would run K BPE iterations. (In practice, the
      number of training iterations in practice is determined by the target
      vocabulary size. For example, to reach GPT -3's target vocabulary size, one
      would have to run tens of thousands of iterations.)
  c.​ Given your solutions to (a) and (b), and what you know about
      MapReduce's execution model, argue whether MapReduce is a good
      overall framework for BPE training. Hints: (i) Does BPE's iterative nature
      fit well with MapReduce? (ii) Within a single BPE iteration, think about
      which parts can exploit MapReduce's parallelism well, and which parts
      limit parallelism. Please use only the MapReduce instructions above.

                ====== END OF HOMEWORK 1 =====

                                                                                   7
