CS425, Distributed Systems: Fall 2026
      Machine Programming 1 – Distributed Log Querier
                                                         Released: Aug 25, 2026
         Due (Hard Deadline): Sun, Sep 13, 2026 (code + report due by 11.59 PM)
                                            Demos on Monday September 14, 2026

Please form groups of exactly 2 students for the MPs by Monday August 31st. Do
not email us your group information, instead fill out the form (see
“Assignments” page on course website). This is a hard deadline so we can
create per-group VMs that are required for all MPs. (If you don’t submit, you
don’t get VMs, and you can’t do the MPs).

Note that these MPs are only for non-Coursera (non-MCS Online-Coursera
program) students who are enrolled for 4 credits. MCS Coursera students should
attempt the MPs on Coursera.

Covfefe! Inc. is the newest and naivest fictitious cloud startup in Silicon Valley.
They went bankrupt 3 years ago, but the company made a miraculous comeback
recently under a new CEO, who is also the old CEO; as in the iconic closing lyric
from The Who: “meet the new boss, same as the old boss”. Their business model
is to fix typos in people’s tweets/X’s – go figure! In any case, the company just
discovered that distributed systems are hard to debug. Since you knew that
already (from CS425), they’ve hired you to build a system that is fast and correct.

You will use the aforementioned CS VM Cluster for your MPs.

DO NOT use LLMs for generating your MP1 code. MP1 is simple, and you’ll
lose out on valuable learning of fundamentals. If we find signs of LLM usage or
if you’re unable to explain your code during your demo then you will get a zero
for this MP.

First, debuggers (e.g., gdb, lldb, IDEs) work well mostly in single-threaded
programs. The popular approach to debugging distributed systems is logging.
Each VM logs status messages, error messages, and other useful debugging
information into one or more local files. These logs are then queried remotely
during debugging.

Second, any code that we write will have bugs. One technique used by the
industry to ensure program correctness is unit testing. A unit test invokes a
small unit of our program, typically a small module, with some input data and
automatically verifies that it produces the desired outputs. More sophisticated

testing (integration, end-2-end, etc) is done only after unit testing has been
satisfactorily completed. Unit tests can be short or long, but are expected to be
comprehensive, e.g., by exploring most code paths. Unit tests are run without
manual intervention. The total amount of unit test code typically is larger than
the program being tested.

This MP has two related parts.

I. Write a program that allows you to query distributed log files on multiple
machines, from any one of those machines. The scenario is that you have N (>5)
machines (N=10 in the demo), each with a generated log file (named
machine.i.log, where i is the VM number). You open a terminal on any of those N
machines. You should now be able to execute a grep command that runs on all
the log files across all machines, and prints output on your terminal: it must
include the appropriate line counts for each matching file (with the file name
where the match came from). If you call the grep executable directly, it is also
acceptable to output the number of lines returned by grep. You do not need to
implement grep from scratch, instead you can call a library implementation of
grep or similar program (please ensure you are able to call all the original grep
options, especially arbitrary regexps or regular expressions via the -E flag: you
should not have to re-implement these options).

Make your program fast. Design before you code. Think about query speed –
when you have an infrequent pattern, does it make sense to fetch all the log files
to the querying machine and to then run grep? What about when you have a
frequent pattern? Does it even make sense fetching files to the querier, or should
you always be doing the grep in a local, parallel way at the individual VMs?

You can choose some convenient way to create the log files. You are free to use
the cout/print capabilities of your language. Alternately, you can use Apache
Common’s         logging       libraries    (see   Quick        start     guide:
http://commons.apache.org/proper/commons-logging/guide.html#Quick%20
Start), but please make sure that anything you use is installable on the CS VM
Cluster (with your permission levels). You cannot reuse any remote querying
capabilities from these external libraries.

As we get close to the demo date, we will give you a list of log files to be used
during the demo. Your MP should run correctly regardless of the log file size, but
the demo will test your program on log files with ~300,000 lines.

DO NOT use Mapreduce or Mapreduce-like approaches to solve this MP.
That’s an overkill, and if you do it, Covfefe! Inc. will say, “You’re Fired!” for this
mistake.

II. How do you know your program works? This is the MP’s second part – you
will write unit tests. While unit tests typically run locally, for this MP, you need
to write distributed unit tests. At the minimum, a unit test that we want you to
write is one that generates log files at every machine with some known lines and
other random lines. The log-querying program then runs multiple greps and
verifies automatically that the results are what you expect. You should use query
patterns that are rare, frequent, and somewhat frequent, and patterns that occur
in one/some/all logs. Tests don’t need to be fast or short; they need to be as
comprehensive as possible.

If you are comfortable using a testing framework, you can consider some
frameworks that are popular in the industry, e.g., googletest, junit, etc.
Alternatively, if you find it easier to just write the tests in a raw manner (function
calls), that’s fine too.

Your log-querying program must be fault-tolerant, i.e., it should fetch answers
from all machines that have not failed. It is ok to initialize your instances with
hard state, e.g., machine names or ip addresses. Also, while a query is in
progress, the querying machine will never fail, but other machines containing
logs might fail. It should be noted that any machine should be able to act as the
querying machine.

You can assume that machines are fail-stop, i.e., once failed, they do not come
back online. If you’re looking for a challenge, you could implement node rejoins,
but it’s not needed for MP1.

We consider this a “bootstrap” MP for multiple reasons. For e.g., you will use the
log-querying program for debugging your subsequent MPs.

You will use sockets (or RPCs if you’re using Go). You will be using sockets or
RPCs in future MPs so you can use MP1 to brush up your socket programming
skills. You can use other libraries that are components in your code.

Machines: You will be using the CS VM Cluster machines for everything,
including the demo. Approximately 10 VMs will be assigned to each MP group.
You do not need to wait for the VMs to be assigned to get started on
development. You can run multiple processes on your personal machine to test
your early code while we wait for the VMs to get provisioned by IT. The VMs do
not have persistent storage, so you are required to use git to manage your code
(git is an industry standard, so here’s a chance to learn another useful thing!). By
Aug 28, we will post instructions on Piazza detailing how to set up your course
GitHub repo for MP version control & submission. If you want to clone your
repo on the VMs, you can set up a PAT (or SSH key).

Demo: Demos are scheduled on the Monday right after the MP is due. The
demos will be on your CS VM Cluster machines; you will use all your
provisioned VMs during your demo. Please make sure your code runs on the
CS VM Cluster machines, especially if you’ve used your own machines/laptops
to do most of your coding. Please make sure that any third party code you use is
installable on CS VM Cluster. Demo details and a signup sheet will be made
available closer to the demo date. All group members must attend demos in
person (MCS Chicago students can dial in via Zoom—please create a Zoom link).

Language: Choose your favorite language! We recommend one of
C++/Java/C/Go/Rust (but you are free to go beyond this list!). We will release
“Best MPs” from the class in these languages only (so you can use them in
subsequent MPs).

Report: Submit a report of less than 1 page (12 pt font, typed only - no
handwritten reports please!). Briefly describe your design (algorithm used), very
briefly describe your unit tests (you don’t need to detail each of them), and the
average query latency (defined as time for the last machine to respond with the
last byte to the query) when 4 machines each store 60 MB log files. Plot the
latency for (i) frequent, (ii) infrequent, and (iii) rare queries. Make sure you run at
least 5 trials per data point, and plot both average and standard deviation. (In the
past, students typically lost points in MPs because they didn’t plot standard
deviations. Standard deviations should always be plotted as “error bars”
alongside average. Do not plot SD as a separate plot from average – it is hard to
reconcile the two.)

Draw plots where you can – this is more visual than a table or numbers inside
text. Discuss your plots, don’t just put them on paper, i.e., discuss trends, and
whether they are what you expect or not (why or why not). Measurement
numbers don’t lie, but we need to make sense of them! Stay within the page limit
– for every line over the page limit you will lose 1 point!

Submission: (1) Submit your report to Gradescope BEFORE the deadline, and
TAG your page(s) on Gradescope (there will be a penalty if you don’t). Only one
group member should submit – you must tag your partner.
(2) There will also be a demo of each group’s MP1. Signup sheets & demo
instructions will be posted on Piazza.
(3) Submit your working code via the MP1 code submission form. In your repo,
please include a README explaining how to compile, how to run your unit
tests, and how to run your MP1 code. Further submission instructions will be
posted on Piazza.

When should I start? We strongly recommend that you start early on this MP.
Each MP involves a significant amount of planning, design, and

implementation/debugging/experimentation work. Do not leave all the work
for the days before the deadline – there will be no extensions.

Evaluation Break-up: Demo [40%], Report (including design and performance)
[40%], Code readability and comments [20%].

Academic Integrity: You cannot look at others’ solutions, whether from this year
or past years. We will run Moss to check for copying within and outside this class
– first offense results in a zero grade on the MP, and second offense results in an F
in the course. There are past examples of students penalized in both those ways,
so just don’t cheat. You can discuss only the MP spec and lecture concepts with
other students and on the forum, but not solutions, ideas, or code. If we see you
posting code on the forum, that’s a zero on the MP. If you do, Covfefe! Inc. is
watching and will be Sad!

Contributions by Group Members: We recommend you stick with the same
group from one MP to the next (this helps keep the VM mapping sane on IT’s
end), except for exceptional circumstances. We expect all group members to
contribute equivalently to the overall effort. If you believe your group members
are not, please have “the talk” with them first, give them a second chance. If that
doesn’t work either, please approach one of the instructors.

   Happy Logging; the fictitious Covfefe! Inc. is watching
                            you!
