Hi there, ah, so
in this series of lectures, we'll look at, uh, time
in distributed systems. Uh, time is a very important
and challenging concept, and, uh, we have to, uh,
either solve it as an issue or get around it,
uh, in, uh, some way. So, uh, here's an example
of, uh, why, uh, time is an important issue and
why you need synchronization. Suppose you wanna catch
a bus, at 6:05pm. But your watch
is off by 15 minutes. If your watch is,
uh, 15 minutes late, essentially you're gonna
miss the bus, cause you're gonna arrive
15 minutes late at the bus stop. If your watch is 15 minutes
early, maybe you'll end up, uh, waiting quite a long, uh, time,
15 minutes extra, while you might have been doing, um, something else
that was more useful. So, uh, because your clock
is not synchronized, because your watch
is not synchronized, uh, either you have
a violation of correctness, when you miss the bus, or violation of fairness, when you end up waiting
too long for the bus. What about in the cloud? Why is synchronization
needed in the cloud? So let's consider an example of a cloud airline
reservation system. So, this might be one
of the, uh, online airline- airline reservation sites that
you go to to book a flight. Um, uh, Server A receives, uh,
a client request, uh, to purchase the last ticket on a flight, say ABC123. It, um, replies to the client, uh, and simultaneously, uh, timestamps the purchase, uh, wi-with its clock
as 9h:15m:32.45s. It then logs it on desk. It replies ok to the client. Uh, now, that was
the very last seat, so the flight
is not full-now full. So A sends a message to Server
B saying the flight is full. B enters, uh, the information
that this particular flight is full into its log along
with its own local clock value, which happens
to read 9h:10m:10.11s. Notice that this is different
from server A's time, because a-after all, the two
servers are not synchronized in terms of their clocks. Now Server C,
a third server, comes along and queries A's and B's logs and it finds that A
has, uh, purchased a, uh, ticket on behalf of a client at 9:15, while the flight
was actually full at 9:10. And this confuses C and this may
lead, uh, C to take actions that are in fact, incorrect. Uh, and, uh, for instance, C might assume that more, uh,
seats have opened up on the flight and
that's not gonna be, uh, good or correct for any
of the passengers. So if A and B had been
synchronized in their clocks, this issue would not
have, uh, happened if both the clocks
had read exactly the same at any point of time. This iss-issue
would not have arised. So why is, uh, synchronizing
the clocks of different, uh, uh, uh, processes
so challenging, uh, in, uh, internet-based
systems like clouds? Well, each of the, uh, processes, uh, run on their own clocks, typically this is
a system clock, uh, on, the motherboard
of the, uh, machine on which that particular processor, uh, is running, where this process
is, um, uh, scheduled. Uh, but, uh, unlike
the processors on a, uh, single machine, which share
the same system clock, in a distributed system which is known as an
asynchronous distributed system, which, uh, is an internet,
uh, based system the different processes running
on different machines don't necessarily share
the same system clock. Uh, essentially all they share
is a network through which
they can send messages. Also there are no bounds on how long messages
take to get delayed, and there are no bounds
on how long processes take to process
individual instructions. This is what is known as the asynchronous
distributed system model. This is unlike the synchronous
distributed system model, which is true in multi-processor
or supercomputer or parallel systems where
many processes share a single system clock. And this, uh, asynchrony
makes it challenging to, um, synchronize clocks because of the
unpredictable message delays and you'll see this, uh,
quite soon as we go along. So, uh, some definitions
before we proceed. An Asynchronous Distributed
System consists of a number of processes. Uh, processes is
the plural of process, and, uh, each process is, what you might normally imagine a-a process is, it consists
of its own code, uh, its own heap, its own program counter, its own stack, its, uh, registers
and so on and so forth. So all of these put together, uh, all count
as the processes state. This includes the value
of its variables and everything. Now each process may change
its state by taking actions. An action might be
an instruction, uh, it may increment a variable and that changes that variable so it also changes
that process's state. Or it might send a message
to someone else, to some other process, or it might just receive
a message from another process. These are the three kinds
of actions, or events that can happen,
uh, in this system. An instruction, a message send
to another process, or a message being received, from another process. Now each process
has a local clock, um, and events within a process can be assigned timestamps, based on this local clock, because a local clock
only increases linearly, it only moves forward, it never moves backwards,
or- and it never gets stuck. Okay, so events within a given
process at a given process, can be ordered linearly. However, what we really wanna do
in a distributed system is order events across processes we want to say that this event
at Process A, um, and this other event
at Process B, uh, happened
in this particular order where, uh, maybe the first event
at Process A occurred before. So that's
the challenge over here. So, uh, when you want
to synchronize, uh, clocks across different processes in a group, um, uh, there are two terms
that come into play, they are
clock skew and clock drift. Clock skew is
the relative difference in the clock values
of two processes, while clock drift is
a reler-relative difference in their speeds, or their clock frequencies
or their clock rates. Uh, think of this as, uh, two
vehicles moving on the road. Clock skew is
the distance between them at any point of time, and
the distance may not be fixed. If the two, uh, vehicles are,
uh, moving at the same speed, then the clock skew will stay
the same as always. Uh, but if they are moving
at different speeds, then the clock skew
might change. Clock drift is the difference in
the speeds of the two vehicles. And so, a non-zero clock skew, uh, implies that clocks
are not synchronized. So what we really wanna do
if we wanna synchronize clocks is we wanna get
a non-zero clock skew. Uh, sorry- uh, sorry, we wanna
get a clock, zero clock skew, we want to have no difference between the clock values
of the two processes. In non-zero clock drift,
a difference, um, uh, in the speeds
of the two process clocks causes, uh, the two clocks,
to, uh, eventually drift. Clauses-causes the clock skew
to eventually increase. Okay, the faster vehicle
is ahead on the road, uh, it will drift away and the
clock skew is gonna increase. If the faster vehicle
is behind the slower vehicle, then it will catch up and eventually
then it will drift away. Um, uh, well ahead in front, and the clock skew will
eventually increase. So what we really want
to-to do is we want to get the clock skew,
uh, down to zero. So how often
do you wanna synchronize the clocks
of different processes? Well, uh, this sort
of defen-depends on the maximum drift rate
of the clock. Um, the absolute maximum
drift rate or absolute MDR is defined relative
to the UTC time, which is the correct time
at any point of time. The UTC time is maintained
by correct atomic clocks, um, uh, at standards bodies. Uh, the MDR for process, of a given process depends
on the environment. Okay, so MDR is, uh, uh, is-is
devin-defined with respect, uh, to something and,
uh, when you say absolute MDR, it's defined with respect
to the, uh, UTC. Now the maximum drift rate
between two clocks with similar MDR,
with the same MDR, with the same absolute
MDR is 2*MDR. Why is this? Well in the worst case, one
of these clocks may be MDR ahead or faster than UTC. The other clock may be
MDR slower than UTC, and so the-the
relative difference between them is (2*MDR). So given a maximum acceptable
skew M between any pair of, uh, process clocks- um, clocks
are two different processes, you need to synchronize,
uh, the clocks, uh, once every M/(2*MDR)
time units, okay, where MDR is your maximum, uh,
drift rate that you know for the individual processes and M is your maximum
acceptable skew, which the application
can tolerate. Why is it M/(2*MDR)? This is the same reason
as time=distance/speed. Now there are two terms
that come into play when you wanna synchronize,
uh, process clocks. They are external and
internal synchronization. In external synchronization, each process, uh, uh, clock
is, uh, synchronized with respect to an external,
um, uh, time source, such as a UTC time source. So process i's, uh, clock may
be, uh, at most D, uh, seconds, um, uh, eh, in error compared
with the external times clock. So, |C(i)-S|, is, uh, always
less than the bound D at all points of time. Okay, so examples of algorithms
that try to achieve external synchronization
are the Cristian's algorithm and the NTP algorithm, which you will see later on
in this lecture series. On the other hand,
internal synchronization does not use an external source. Instead the processes in the
group themselves, um, uh, use, uh, each of theirs
clocks for synchronize. And this means that, uh, if you
wanna bound inside the group, then you wanna make sure that
for any pair of processes (i,j) the difference
between their clocks, the clocks skew between i and j, uh, the absolute value
of that is less than, uh, D. An example of an algorithm that, uh, achieves internal internal synchronization is the Berkeley algorithm. So, th-the external
and internal synchronization are related to each other. If you have
external synchronization in a given group,
with a bound of D, this automatically implies
internal synchronization with a bound of 2*D. Why is this? Well, in the worst case, uh,
a process may be D ahead of the external source, and another process may be D
behind the external source, so that the difference between
them and distance is 2*D. But the other way around
is not true, so, if you have internal synchronization, in a group, ah, then there does not imply
external synchronization with respect to any time source. Uh, in fact, the entire group
may drift away, as a whole, from a given external source, and this is one of the, um, uh,
uh, one of the disadvantages of using internal,
uh, synchronization. So next- in the next lecture,
we'll see, uh, some algorithms
that are used, and some techniques
that are used in real systems
for synchronizing clocks in, uh, cloud computing systems and in distributed systems.