In this lecture we'll see the, um, FLP proof of
the impossibility of consensus in asynchronous
distributed systems. So consensus is
impossible to solve in the asynchronous
distributed system. This is a result
that was proved, uh, in a now-famous result
by Fischer, Lynch and Patterson in 1983, also known
as the FLP result, using the, uh, first letters
of the last names of the three coauthors
of that paper. Uh, before then, many distributed systems designers had been claiming
100% reliability, uh, for their systems, and this result stopped
them dead in their tracks. A lot of claims of reliability
vanished overnight, and one of the, uh,
long-term side effects of this was the multiple 9s
of reliability, um, offerings that vendors
now publicize for their products and services. So once again,
just to remind you, um, the asynchronous distributed system has no bounds on message delays
and p-or processing delays or, uh, clock drift rates. These might be arbitrarily
long or arbitrarily short. The consensus problem requires
each process, uh, p, uh, to decide on the same value. So each process p has a state which consists of the program counter, the registers, the stack, the local variables, the heap, anything else that you would consider to be a part of the, uh, core, uh,
dump of the process. It also has initial, um,
an input register xp, which is initially
either 0 or 1. Different processes
might have different, uh, input register values, that is, those processes', uh, um, proposal to the group, and then each process also has an output register yp which is initially undecided
but needs to be set to 0 or 1. The only constraint is
once you set the output register you cannot change it. And remember that each, uh, process has
its own output register, um, and you want to make sure, uh, that the consensus, uh, uh, protocol at the end, um, uh, has all
the non-faulty processes set their output variables
to be all-0s or-or all-1s. So you want an all-0s decision among the non-faulty processes or an all-1s decision among
the non-faulty processes. Once again, this problem just
by itself, just with these, uh, two, uh, constraints is enough,
uh, to solve consensus because you can just say, "Well, everyone set their
output variables to be 0 all the time,
and that solves it," but that is not interesting
or, uh, useful at all. So we have the non-triviality
clause that says that at least one initial
system state leads to each of the above outcomes, meaning that at least
one initial system state leads to an all-0s outcome, and at least
one initial system state leads to an all-1s outcome. So let's try
to set up the proof. Uh, for the impossibility proof, uh, we'll consider
a more restrictive system model and an easier problem. Well, essentially this is okay
because if you can show that an easier problem is
also impossible to solve, then obviously
the consensus problem, the harder consensus problem, is easier to solve,
is impossible to solve. Uh, if you also sh-if you show that in a more
restrictive system model, uh, the consensus problem is, uh, impossible to solve, then obviously in the less restrictive system model, um, it's impossible
to solve, as well. So, uh, what do I mean
by restrictive system model? Uh, instead of considering
the entire network, we'll consider the network to be a simple global message buffer. When a process p sends a message
to a process p', message m, the message m
just gets deposited in the global message buffer. Subsequently, p' may, uh, call the global message buffer with, uh, receive, and this may return either the message m that is waiting for it or it may return null, and it may continue
returning null, uh, for a while, or maybe even forever, because the message m might be delayed for arbitrarily long. Okay, so we have abstracted
out our network to be just this, uh, global message buffer that is sitting underneath
all the processes. Uh, we also define, uh,
the state of a process, which we have seen before. It consists of its,
uh, program counter, heap, registers, stack
and everything else, along with the input
and output variables, but we also define a state
for the entire system. We call this global
state a configuration. Uh, now, uh, the configuration
or global state consists of a collection
of states, one state for each process, alongside the state
of the global buffer itself. So the state
of all the processes along with the state
of the network is, uh, the global state,
or the configuration. Now we also define an event. This is slightly different
from the Lamport events you've seen before. An event consists of, uh, three steps which are executed atomically, or in one shot. Uh, the event starts
with the receipt of a message by a process, say a process p. Then the message
is processed by the process p. Uh, this may change
the recipient's state. Process p's state might change
as a result of this, and p might also resi-decide
to send out some messages, as a result of this receipt, and those messages
that then result, are then deposited
in the global message buffer. Uh, so all these three,
uh, steps put together, uh, determine an event. So an event essentially consists of a process p
receiving a message, uh, processing it and
then depositing the resulting, uh, messages into the
global message buffer and then, uh, that's an event. Next we'll define a schedule. A schedule is simply
a linear sequence of events, so one event followed by another event followed by another event, that's a schedule, okay? So here on the left is
an example of a schedule. You start with a configuration
or a global state; we label that as c. An event e'
is applied to it. This means that process p'
receives m', uh, processes it and deposits any resulting messages into the global message buffer. That changes the state
of process p'. It also changes the state of the global
message buffer potentially, and that means the configuration itself has changed, and it has changed to something else which we label as c'. A different event, e'', will change the configuration again similarly to, uh, another configuration c''. Now, these two events,
e' followed by e'', is a schedule, because it's
a linear sequence of events, and we call that a schedule s. When the schedule s is applied
on the initial configuration c, this c here is the same
as this c here, it results
in the configuration c''. Again, this c'' is the same
as the c, this c''. So the left side of the slide is equivalent to the right side of the slide. 'Kay, so the schedule
is, essentially, a compact way of representing
a sequence of events rather than mentioning
each event separately. So, here is our first, uh,
lemma, or our first result. It says that disjoint
schedules are commutative. What does this mean? If I have a schedule s1, consisting of some sequence
of events, and another schedule s2, consisting of another sequence of events, if the sets of receiving processes in s1, remember that each schedule consists of a set of messages being received
as a set of processes, if I consider
all these processes in s1, which received messages, and all the processes in s2, that receive messages, if these two sets are disjoint, meaning there are
no processes in common, uh, receiving messages
in both s1 and s2, then these schedules
are commutative. In other words,
their order can be flipped. So if you apply s1 first
on a configuration c and then s2 to reach,
to reach a state c'', then in a different scenario, if you apply s2 first on,
uh, c, and then s1, you would reach
the same final configuration, c'', okay? So, uh, w-why is this true? Well, um, this is true because these are disjoint sets
of receiving processes, and applying s1
or s2 in any order would result
in the same final outcome. In fact, interweaving s1 and s2 would also result
in the same outcome, which would be
the configuration c''. So earlier, uh, we
saw consensus problem here. We tried to prove
the impossibility about an easier consensus problem where some process, not just all, but some process, eventually sets its yp variable, its upper variable,
to be 0 or a 1. 'Kay, and also we'll assume
that only one process crashes, but we are free to choose
which process, uh, crashes. Uh, we define configurations
to have valences. Uh, configuration C may have a set of decision values V reachable from it, and since we are only considering 0 or 1 decisions, um, there might be either 2 or 1 decisions reachable from it. If both the decisions, both, and all-0s and an all-1s outcome are reachable from it, then we say that the size
of the valency is 2, and we say that
the configuration C is bivalent. If only one decision
is reachable from it, either a 0, an all-0s decision, or an all-1s decision,
uh, not both, uh, then the configuration C
is said to be, uh, 0-valent or 1-valent,
respectively. Bivalent essentially means that the configuration C
is unpredictable. That is, it doesn't know which
value it's going to reach, and essentially what we're going to show is that, um, a system can always be kept
in the bivalent state. That it-that is,
it can always be prevented from ever making a decision and ever being sure
about its decision. So the FLP proof
shows two things. First, it shows that there is
some initial configuration, the global state,
that is bivalent by itself, and second it shows
that there is some sequence, there is always some sequence
of events that happen, uh, in a system that start
from a bivalent configuration that keeps the system state or the configuration also bivalent. So, essentially,
there is always some, uh, things that could happen
in the system, um, that, uh, keeps the system moving from one bivalent
configuration to another, and so prevents the system
from ever reaching a decision, uh, with respect to consensus. So let's show the first, um,
part of this proof, that's the second lemma. Uh, i-uh, here we show that some initial configuration
is bivalent. Well let's assume, uh,
that this is not true; let's prove it by contradiction. Let's assume that all initial
configurations are either 0-valent or 1-valent, okay? Now, if there are N processes
in the system, there are 2^N positive
initial configurations. Well, why is this? Well each of the processes
can propose either 0 or 1 for its input variable, and so you have two possibilities for each process, and so this means
that there are 2^N possible initial configurations. Now we create a lattice here, this is, of course,
a virtual lattice, uh, where the nodes
in the lattice are the initial configurations, so there are 2^N, uh, nodes
in this lattice. This lattice is essentially a
hypercube, uh, with dimension N. uh, we, uh, link two, uh,
configurations together, we join them by an edge, uh, if they're d-if they differ
in the initial xp, the initial input variable value
for exactly one process, okay? Uh, this means that, uh, you know, suppose I have, uh,
2 processes, P1 and P2, uh, then I'm going to have a lattice that has, uh, four, um, uh, nodes in it,
four initial configurations where the initial values for,
uh, the, um, uh, for the, uh, uh, uh, ini-for the input variables are 0,0,1,0,1,1, and um, uh, 0,1. And in this, uh, the 0,0 node
is going to be linked to the 1,0 node because they, uh, differ in the input variable values for P1 only, exactly 1 process. Also, the 1,1, uh, node is going
to be linked to the, um, 1,0 node because, uh,
these 2 configurations differ in the input variable
values for P2. And so, essentially, the hypercube in this 2 process case looks like a square. The hypercube
for the 3 process case looks like a cube, and so on and so forth, okay? Now, essentially, um, this, uh, here we are saying that each configuration is either 0-valent or 1-valent, there are
no bivalent configurations. So we tag each configuration
with a 0 or a 1 according to its, uh, valency, either 0-valent or 1-valent. And because there is
at least one 0-valent state, at least one configuration stacked with a 0, and at least one
1-valent state, at least one configuration
tagged with a 1, and because everything
is connected, uh, in just one hypercube, it has to be the case that at least one 0-valent configuration is linked directly to a 1-valent configuration, okay? This, you can, uh,
imagine the hypercube and, uh, you will see that this is true. So this means that
these two configurations differ in the input variables
for exactly one process, say that process is p, and let's say we consider around where this process p
has crashed; that is,
it is silent throughout. Both the initial configurations
are indistinguishable, because the only thing
that differed between these configurations
is the state of p, but p has crashed, so as far as the system running is concerned, p has no effect on it, but this means that both these initial configurations are in fact the same. One of them will, in fact, result in an all-0's outcome, the 0-valent configuration, and the other one will result
in a one-in an all-1's outcome because it's
a 1-valent configuration. So this initial configuration, either one of these
two configurations where p has crashed is, in fact, a bivalent configuration because it may result
in an all-0's decision or it may result
in an all-1's decision. 'Kay, so we have shown that when you have
one process that could crash, and we can choose which process is the one that crashes, you can have at least one
bivalent configuration that is the initial configuration in the system. Okay, so that's
the first part of the proof. Next we need to show that, um, starting from
a bivalent configuration, there is always another bivalent configuration that is reachable. Notice that this proof
doesn't say that you can never reach consensus ever. It says that there
is always some way in which you can be prevented
from reaching consensus. Let the red configuration
be a bivalent configuration, and let, uh, the event e, which consists of the process p receiving a message m, that is the global message buffer in the red configuration, the sum event that is applicable
to the initial configuration, so m is in the global message
buffer in the red configuration. Now let's put our hand on e and
prevent e from being applied. This means that you
might be able to still apply some other events
on the red configuration, and there are
some configurations that you might be able to reach, starting from
this red configuration. We call that set to be C, okay? Those are
the blue configurations that are shown in the triangle. These are the configurations that are reached without applying the special event e. why are we not applying e? You'll see in a moment,
there is a reason for it. Now, if you take
any one of these blue or the red configurations in the-in the triangle, and you apply the single
event e to it, the special event e to it, you will reach another
dark blue event. Let that set of events,
the dark blue set of events, be called as D, 'kay? Once again, D, any event in, any configuration D is reached by applying the special event e on any one of the configurations in the triangle. Now, this is the summary
of what we have discussed. You have the initial bivalent
configuration, the red one. You don't apply the event e
to it, and you reach, and all the possible states, uh, that are reachable are
in the triangle. You take one of the
configurations in the triangle and you apply the event e to it, you'll reach a state that is, or a configuration that
is in the set D. Okay, so we claim that the set D contains a bivalent configuration, okay, and, again, the proof here
is by contradiction. If you can show that
the state D contains a bivalent configuration, then you can show that there is a sequence that consists of at least one event that starts from a bivalent configuration, the red one, that also leads to another bivalent configuration. Let's assume the contradiction. Suppose that D only has 0 and
1-valent contradiction, uh, configurations and no, uh,
bivalent ones. Okay, So there are
these states in D, are going to be tagged
with a 0 or a 1, and because each stated D has a parent in, uh, C from which, on which e was applied
to obtain that D state, we also, uh, tag its parent
with the corresponding 0 or 1. Now what you have is you have
a C of mixing 0's and 1's here, and therefore, just by the same
argument that we use before, where we showed that there has to be at least one bivalent configuration because at least one 0-valence state and one 1-valence state are adjacent to each other, you can show here as well,
that in this triangle there's going to be
at least two configurations, that are adjacent to each other, because all of them are linked by other events other than e so that one is tagged with a 0, the other is tagged with a 1. In other words, it has to be
the case that there are states or configurations D0 and D1, both in D, and C0 and C1 both in C such that D0 is 0-valent,
D1 is 1-valent. D0 is obtained
from C0 by applying e, D1 is obtained from C1 by applying e,
and C1 is adjacent to C0, which means that C0 is,
on C0 if you apply some event e' a special event e',
you will obtain C1. So given this,
there are two possibilities. First, that the process,
receiving the message p' in the special event e'
is the same as p, which is the process receiving the message in event e, and the second case is that p' is, uh, not the same as p, 'Kay, so let's consider
the first case, p' is not the-the same as p. from the previous slides, C0, when you apply e'
to it, you get C1. C0, when you apply
e to it, you get D0. C1, when e is applied
to it you get D1. Since e and e' have different sets
of receiving processes, these are disjoint sequences, and so flipping the order
in which they are applied, e' first, followed by e,
or e followed by e', will give you the same
final configuration. In other words, you can draw
this red arrow here and show that you can reach from D0 you can reach D1 as well. But this is a contradiction,
because we said D0 was 0-valent, but we have just showed that from D0 you can reach
a 1-valent state as well, which means that
in fact D0 is bivalent, and that is a contradiction. So that's the first case,
where p' is not the same as p. That was the easy case because e and e'
were commutative over here, and we could use
our first lemma. So what about the second case? The second case
looks a bit complicated, but just bear with me. I'll try to explain it. So once again, here C0
applied e gets you D0, C0 applied e' gets you C1, C1 applied e gets you D1, okay? So let's say C0 has
a schedule s which is finite, it consists of a finite set
of steps, because we say that consensus is in fact reachable in a finite set of steps, and it's a deciding round,
in which p takes no steps. The special process p, which is the process p
in receiving the message in the event e,
that is arbitrarily slow, so it does not receive
any messages over here, uh, and it
does not take any steps in this schedule s over here. But it's a deciding round, which means that when final configuration A is reached, a decision has been made, okay? Now, what is that decision? Well, we don't know
what the decision is. So now, since p is not there
in the schedule s, the schedule s is disjoint
from the schedule consisting of the single event e, and so these two schedules
can be commutated. So if you apply e first
followed by schedule s, that is, you apply schedule s
on D0, you reach some state E0, which has to be a 0-valent state because D0 is 0-valent. On the other hand, if you apply
schedule s first followed by e, in other words,
when you apply e on A, you get the same
0-valent state E0. On the other hand, if you apply
e' and e followed by s, or s followed by e' and e, remember that these
two schedules are disjoint because p appears in only this schedule but doesn't appear here and then what you will see is that you, uh, reach from A another sche-configuration E1, which is also reachable from D1. But because
it's reachable from D1, E1 must be
a 1-valent configuration. However, we said that A
was a deciding state in which either
an all-0's decision or an all-1's decision
had already been reached. However, here you can see that
from A you can reach both a 0-valent configuration E0 as well as 1-valent configuration E1. This is a contradiction, because
said that A is a deciding state, and this means that from C0 you, might never, ever be able to reach a decision, okay? So this is a contradiction
for the second case, and this completes our proof. Here we have shown that, uh, starting from
a bivalent configuration, there is always another bivalent
configuration that is reachable by applying at least one event, uh, from the initial
bivalent configuration. Okay, so essentially
this means that, um, uh, there is always something that can go wrong in the system that, uh, keeps the system
in a bivalent state. This doesn't mean that the system
will never reach consensus. It means that there is
at least some path, some sequence of events, that, um, will prevent the system from reaching consensus, that is, it stays
bivalent forever. So in summary here, the consensus problem
is an important problem because it deals with agreement in distributed systems. Solutions exist
in the synchronous system model, but we have just shown here that it is impossible to solve in the asynchronous
system model. Uh, this is important because
asynchronous system model is what is true in the internet, um, um, uh, and the other, uh, distributed systems that appear
in cloud computing systems. The key idea in the FLP
impossibility proof is that just one slow or, uh, crashed process can prevent the other processes in the system from ever reaching a-a decision. And again, nowhere in the proof
that we've seen, so far, have we actually discussed details of the consensus protocol that you might propose. Uh, wh-what we
have discussed so far applies to any consensus protocol that you might propose, and that's the beauty
of the proof, that it is generic and it applies no matter what the protocol is trying to do. It, all it assumes is that
protocols, uh, send messages. Okay, and this is one
of the most fundamental results in distributed systems, uh, and
that's why we have discussed it.