[MUSIC] In this lecture, we are going to
discuss another classical algorithm for distributed mutual exclusion, and we also wrap up our discussion
of the mutual exclusion topic. So the Ricart-Agrawala Algorithm
that you've seen already from mutual exclusion requires replies from
all of the processes in the group, which is one of the reasons
that it has a high bandwidth. It has a bandwidth that is order N. The key idea in the Maekawa's Algorithm,
new algorithm, is that you need to get replies from
only some processes in the group, not all the processes but only some. But you also need to ensure that only one
process is given access to the critical section at any point of time which
means that safety is guaranteed. So Maekawa's Algorithm works as follows, each process Pi is associated
with a voting set called Vi. A voting set consists of a few
other processes from the group. Each process must belong
to its own voting set Vi. Now, the voting set is not all
the other process in the group which is essentially the approach of
the Ricart-Agrawala Algorithm, but the voting set is only
a small subset of the group. However, you need to make sure that
given any two voting sets Vi and Vj of process Pi and Pj, respectively. The intersection of these two
voting sets is non-empty. Which means that there's at least
one process that belongs to both Vi as well as Vj. So given any pair of voting sets, Vi and
Vj, you need to make sure that at least one process is in common
between those two voting sets. This might sound familiar to you, in fact,
it is the same concept of the same idea as Quorums, which you have
seen elsewhere in the course. And however,here, the usage of this
is slightly different of course. Now each voting set is of size K. So all the voting sets
are of similar size. And each process contributes by
belonging to M other voting sets, including, of course, its own. Maekawa shows that the values of K
= M = square root of N, work best. We'll see a calculation
later on in this lecture, which calculates why square
root of N is a good value. One way of assigning voting sets so that
they are always intersecting in any pair of voting sets, and so that you get
order square root of N voting set sizes, is to put all the N processes in a square
root of N by square root of N matrix. And whatever process falls in the matrix, you consider that the processes column and
you also consider the processes row. And all the processes in the column and
in the row all together, the union of them is considered
to be the voting set of that process at the intersection of the row and
the column. So, this would result in voting set
size that is 2*square root of N-1, which is still order of square root of N. So let's see an example. So suppose I have four processes
in the system, of course, this is a perfect square. So we can put them in a matrix
as shown here, p1, p2, p3, p4. And if you select a processes
drawing column as its voting set, then you get voting sets as shown
on the left side of the slide. So consider p1 and the process p1, it's
row consist of the process p1 and p2 and its column consists of the process p1 and
p3. So it's voting set consists of
those three process, p1, p2 and p3, as shown by this circle over here. Similarly, V2 which is the voting set for
p2 consists of the processes p1, p2 and p4, and so on and so forth. You notice that any pair of
processes intersect in at least one, in many cases,
two of the process in the system. So [INAUDIBLE] V1 and V4,
they intersect in two process, p2 and p3, in other systems. So let's see how these
voting sets are used, then. So first of all, each process requests permission from only
its voting set members, not from all. And this is one way in which
the Maekawa's Algorithm differs from the Ricart-Agrawala Algorithm,
that we've seen previously in the course. Second, each process that
is in the voting set, gives permission to at most
one process at a time. And again, this is different from the Ricart-Agrawala
Algorithm where a process may have given permission to multiple, perhaps
all the other processes in the group. Okay, so these are two key differences. Anyway, let's look at how
the algorithm actually works. So first,
initially the state of a given process. Again, we described the algorithm by
describing what happens at a given process. The state of a given process is released
which means that currently does not holding the lock or
it's not in the particular section. Also it's state for voted is false,
meaning that it has not yet voted for any other process to get
access to the critical section. Now, when this process Pi wants to enter
the critical section it first sets its state to be wanted, meaning it wants
to enter the critical section. Then it multicast a request message to all
the processes in its own voting set Vi. Notice that this votings
in Vi also includes itself. So, when Pi sends and receives its own
request, then you have to process it. And I'll describe how this processing
is done in the next slide. Then the process, after sending out
this request message, it waits for a reply or a vote message from all
the processes in its own voting set. And that includes a vote from itself. When it has all these votes,
it can then set a state to be held and then proceed in to the critical section. What happens when a process is
done with the critical section? Well, the first thing it does is that
it sets its state to be released again. Meaning, that it's done
with the critical section. And then multicast release message to all
the processes in it's own voting set Vi. This is not all that there is for
the protocol. Now, when a process Pi receives
a request from Pj, first, it checks if it's own state is held, meaning,
it currently is in the critical section or if it has voted in the past meaning
it's voted variable is true. If either of these conditions is true then
it queues this new request because it means that someone answers
in the critical section. Otherwise, it sends a reply or
a vote back to Pj and it sets its voter variable to be true,
indicating that it has recently voted. Now, when a process Pi receives
a release message from process Pj, recall from the previous slide
that a release message is received when Pj has just exited
the critical section. And informs all its voting set members
that it has exited the critical section. Pi looks at its queue of waiting requests. Remember, that Pi may be in
not just Pj's voting set, but also in the voting set of other processes. And these other processes may
be waiting for a vote from Pi. But if Pi's queue is empty, it means that
Pi doesn't have any outstanding requests and so it sets its voted variable to be
false and it exits in the point of time. However, if there's
something in the queue, then a dequeue is a head of the queue,
say a process, Pk. Remember, that this means that
Pk's voting set contains Pi and that Pk has previously sent a request
to Pi which has been queued. And the queueing happened
here in the past or right at the top of the slide over here. That's where the queueing happened. And in this case, the entry for
Pk is dequeued and a reply message is sent to Pk, meaning that Pi now has voted
for Pk to enter the critical situation. And so
Pi sets its voted variable to be true. So why does this algorithm
guarantee safety? Well, when a process Pi receives replies
from all its voting set members Vi including itself, no other process
Pj could have received replies from all its voting set members Vj. Because Vj would've had intersection
with Vi in at least one process Pk. And Pk could have sent only one reply or
vote at a time. And it always send a vote to Pi, which
means that it could not have voted for Pj as well. And so this means that safety is
guaranteed by the Maekawa Algorithm. For liveness, a process needs to wait for at most N-1 other process to
finish the critical section. And you might think this
guarantees liveness. However, Maekawa's Algorithm has
a subtle behavior in its original form that can actually violate liveness
because it can result in a deadlock. Here is an example of a deadlock. Again, another example of four process P1,
P2, P3, P4. Suppose all the four processes request
access to the critical section. P1 gets some replies but
is waiting for P3's reply. P3, in turn, is waiting for P4's reply,
which is in its voting set. P4 is waiting for P2's reply and P2,
in turn, is waiting for P1's reply. Now, we've complete a cycle or
a circle among these processes, and this is called a deadlock. There is not going to be any
more progress in the system, because these processes are going to
be waiting for these replies forever. So the original Ricart-Agrawala Algorithm
as we've discussed is deadlock prone and these deadlocks can occur. There are of course variance of Maekawa's
Algorithms that have been published that address this issue and
that are free from deadlocks. Returning to original Maekawa's Algorithm,
let's analyze its performance. The bandwidth involved in entering
the critical section is square root of N messages that you send out
to your voting set members. And then square root of N replies so
you see back, so that's 2 times the square
root of N messages. For exit operation you're simply sending
a reply message to all your votings and members, that's just
square root of N messages. These numbers are better than Ricart and Agrawala's Algorithms which
had bandwidths of order N. You might think square root
of N is still a large number. It's not constant for sure,
but it can be fairly small. So if N is a million for instance, then the square root of N value is about
1,000, which is a fairly small number. What about the delays? Well, for the client delay, when no one
has access to the critical section, a process comes up and says hey,
I need access to the critical section. It sends out a request to all
of its voting set members, that's one message transmission because
all these messages are in parallel. And then the responses are received back
also in parallel that's another message latency in the backwards direction. So that's one round trip time. Synchronization delay means that one
process is currently in the critical section, and
one of the processes is waiting to get in. And at this point of time, the releasing
process will send a reply message back to the process Pk, which is the common
process between the two voting sets of the releasing and the waiting process. And then that Pk process which
isn't common will forward a vote to the waiting process which can
now enter the critical section. So that's two message transmission times. One from the releasing process to
the common intersection voting member, and from the voting member
to awaiting process. So why is the square root
of N the right size for the voting sets in Maekawa's Algorithm? Once again, each voting set is of size K, each
process belongs to M other voting sets. Now, the total number of voting
set members is K times N, because each of the N processes
has K members in its voting set. And so, K times N is the total
number of voting set members. Of course because
the voting sets overlap and intersect members or processes
maybe repeated in this K times N. But each process belongs to exactly M
voting sets, so K times N divided by M should be equal to N, because each process
appears exactly M times in this K times N. So K*N/M = N. And if you evaluate this by canceling N
out on both sides you get that K = M. Which means that the sides of
the voting set should equal the number of voting sets that each process is in. Okay, so let's have that equation and
hold it to the side. Now, consider a process Pi. Right, so the number of voting
sets that are there in the system is equal to a Pi's own voting sets so
that's the +1 over here. There are K members in Pi's voting set,
right, that K processes. And each of those processes
has their own voting sets. Right, so that's the total number of
voting sets that is there in the system. Because each of this is a K voting
set member of Pi's is involved in M total voting sets. But one of them is Pi's own voting set. So the remaining voting
sets are simply (M-1)*K. Okay, so that's the total number of
voting sets present in the system. However, the number of voting sets
should equal the number of processes in the system, so
we have N equaling this value. Now, we substitute in the value of M
equals K from the earlier equation, and you get N = (K-1) *K + 1. Solving this you will see that K equals
about a square root of N give or take a little bit. And this explains why K equals M equals
square root of N is the optimal value for minimizing the overhead of K. So in order to minimize K,
we set N = (M-1)*K + 1. And then we use the earlier equation,
K = M, to give us a K = square root of N. Now, the Maekawa's Algorithm of
course does not handle failures. Neither does the ring-based or
the centralized algorithm or the Ricart-Agrawala Algorithm. Of course, there are fault-tolerant
versions of all of these algorithms that exist out there in the literature. Other ways to handle failures include
Paxos-like approaches to handle failures. So Google system called Chubby,
which is used for unlocking is a fairly popular
way to handle failures. To handle failures while doing mutual
exclusion inside of Google's stack. So Chubby uses a system used underneath
Google's storage system such as BigTable and Megastore. Chubby is not been open-sourced but
the technical details and the design of Chubby has been
published in a paper by Google. And that's what we're going to
discuss in very brief detail in this slide and the next. Chubby provides only Advisory locks,
this means that clients must ensure that the access locks before they access the
critical resource, or the object itself. So if clients forget to access the log, then hey,
then mutual exclusion may be violated. So this is why this is
known as Advisory locks. So Chubby, of course,
uses a cluster of servers, and there are five servers by
default in the Chubby cell. One of the servers is marked as Master. Again, this is elected using one of
the Leader Election Protocol that we send you before. In this particular figure,
Server D is a Master. Chubby allows clients
to not only do locking, but also writes small configuration files. And Chubby relies on the Paxos
consensus algorithm. Chubby again, is a group of servers,
as one elected as the Master, the other servers in the group,
the non-master servers are just slaves. They replicate the same
information as the Master. When a client wants to read one of
these small configuration files on the lock file, it sends a read request
to the Master which can serve it locally. Okay, so
the Master serves all the request locally. When a client wants to write, however,
it sends a write request to the Master, which then forwards it to all
these servers in the group. It then gets a majority of them
to respond back to the Master. When a majority of them respond back,
you reach a quorum in the system. Then the Master can send back a response
to the client acknowledging that the write has been done. And so, this is where mutual
exclusion comes into play. If some other client has already got
an access to the critical section, it means that it has access, it has permissions from at least
a quorum of the servers via the Master. And the next request that goes to
the Master will not reach a quorum, and it will wait until that first
process exits its critical section. Now, you can have failures here. If you have failures at the Master,
and the Master fails, then you simply rerun the election
protocol to elect a new master. If the replica fails you simply replace
it, or it reboots by itself, and then have the new replica catch up with
the other servers on the group, or with the Master itself. So Chubby present say fought in way of not
just doing mutual exclusion in the system, but also to maintain
small configuration files which reflects the ways in which Chubby
is used inside of Google stacks. Now being upon discussion
mutual inclusion, it is a very important problem
in cloud computing systems. There are a variety of
classical algorithms. We've discussed four. The Central, the Ring-based,
the Ricart-Agrawala Algorithm and the Maekawa Algorithm. They are not all fault-tolerant but they are fairly efficient and they all
try to guarantee safety and liveness. And as we progress down
from Central to Maekawa, the algorithms have gotten better and
better in terms of performance. Industry uses a variety of systems for
coordination and for mutual exclusion, these include
Chubby at Google which is used for locking and also to maintain
small configuration files. And also Apache Zookeeper which is
an open-sourced system that is used for coordination, and I encourage you to
look up Apache Zookeeper on the web. [MUSIC]