[MUSIC] My name is Tushar Chandra and I've
been a software engineer at Google for about ten years. I got my PhD in computer science,
gosh, a little more than 20 years ago. And then I was at IBM research for
about ten years, and then came to Google. So, I've spent most of my career
working in distributed systems, specifically for distributed systems. Though oft late I've been looking
at large scale machine learning, which I view as the next
layer up in the stack. Where we use distributive systems to
solve, you know, large scale problems. [MUSIC] Yeah, so from my perspective,. We started working on cloud computing
before cloud computing got the name. So I don't actually see that that
transition the way many others do. But the environment we work in is
a very large distributed system. We have lots and lots of computers
over a very, very large network. In fact,
we have multiple data centers, right? And these are interconnected
to high speed links. And then our problems
are very large scale as well, so many of the problems you work on
cannot be solved on a single computer. So we are forced to build these
highly scalable solutions that span multiple computers and
multiple data centers. That's what they call cloud computing now,
but that's what we've been doing essentially since I've been
at Google for the last ten years. >> Absolutely, absolutely. So Paxos is a kind of
distributive consensus algorithm. And there's been, you know, in your
course you've covered a lot of that. But this is very practical, it's a core primitive that we use in
in our cloud computing solutions. So when you have a lot of computers and
you're building higher level primitives. Like MapReduce and BigTable and a distributed file
system like the Google file system. Even at that level you need to
coordinate these computers. Often you need a single leader who's
going to coordinate all the activity in a MapReduce on, in an,
in GFS or in Big Table. And you need, you know, in that setting you need
a leader election kind of mechanism. That leader election mechanism needs to
guarantee that there's just one leader. He needs to notify the rest of
the system when the leader failed, bring in a new leader, that sort of thing. You need to have a distributed
lock managers so that when multiple different computers
are trying to solve the same problem. They don't sort of trip on each other. So things like this and many many other things require low level
distributive computing primitives. Things like distributed consensus. And we do use Paxos extensively. Leader election mechanisms. You know? [MUSIC] The Paxos algorithm that
Lamport talks about. Which is what, our algorithm, our implementation's
definitely based on those ideas. So, I don't want to take away from that,
at all. But, the Paxos algorithm that he talks
about can be expressed in a page or two. Our implementation is like,
more that 10,000 lines of code, right? So, there's something between
what Lamport talks about, which is a core ideas, and
the actual implementation. Some of that is just like,
boilerplate code. You know, how do you send a message,
how do you receive a message, how do you time out,
all the details of that. But some of those, some of it is also
algorithmic fixers that are spelled out in different places in the literature,
but never really put back together. And when you put them together,
the implementation becomes more complex. The way I like to view it is, with every
new feature you add to an algorithm like, a distributed consensus
algorithm like Paxos. You roughly double
the complexity of the algorithm. So, if you add one idea, like, you know,
allowing multiple rounds to happen at the same time, well,
you've doubled the complexity. If you add another idea, like leader election, you double the
complexity again, and so on and so forth. So, you add three or four ideas and
then suddenly you've got a 26,000 line or 50,000 line code base, right? So there's lots of detail in that. The other thing is when you scale from, you know, a two-page paper to tens
of thousands of lines of code. Your proofs, I mean, you have no hopes
of your proofs carrying through. They just can't. You have, you know, a multi-thousand-line
program and you can't prove it correct. We don't we don't really have
the tools to do that yet but there is a lot of
research work on that. So the focus then has to
shift away from the paper and its proofs, and much more towards testing. And so when I built this Paxos
implementation my primary focus was testing. I built a distributed system before of,
of this nature at IBM. And there the focus was algorithms and I realized that was a mistake,
when I built that system. So when I was building this one,
the focus was testing. I kind of knew I would get the algorithm
rola, right, so I didn't even focus on it. And I think that was the right decision. So, what you learn about in
academia about proofs gets replaced to some extent
by testing in industry. Now, you have to know how this
algorithms work because you don't want to start off with a random algorithm. You want to start off with an algorithm
that is almost surely correct, but then from there you take it to a,
to actually correct. I think the best hope we have is testing. [MUSIC] My focus has moved to large
scale machine learning. So I view this as moving up in the stack. And, really, from my point of view,
I've gone from being a developer of distributed computing primitives for
cloud computing. To being a user of those primitives. So, now, I've become a user of MapReduce. And so, implicitly, a user of you know,
a Paxos implementation. And that's really changed my perspective. So, I want to talk a little bit about
that because I think that's what your students will be interested in. so, one of the key ideas that
we had was we did not want to build a distributive system. When you're building
the low-level primitives, your entire job is about
building these primitives. When you're using it. You don't even want to go there. Because when you think about
distributed systems explicitly, it, it, you can take a simple idea and
make it horribly complicated. And that's really not our focus, right? We are in the business
of working on solutions. So we wanted to focus on
the machine learning algorithms, not distributed systems algorithms. And we decided not to build
a distributed system. So instead we use primitive like,
MapReduce and, you know, the Google file system and our classroom
management software and so, on. But we don't do anything on top
of that and that's by design. So for the students in your class, I would really like you to realize
if you're building this stuff. Do it in a way so that people on top
of you don't have to think about it. This should be like plumbing,
it should be in the walls, shouldn't have to think about it. [MUSIC] So let me just step back a little bit and that, Google is, you know,
still growing rapidly as a company. So we are definitely hiring. As you can imagine,
we deal with very large data sets. Think of a data set as, you know,
people doing searches on Google. You can imagine that there are zillions
of such people doing that. And so, you know,
we deal with very large data there. Can think about it other properties,
YouTube, Gmail, Google Docs, Google Plus,. You know, increasingly messed. These are all properties with lots and
lots of data. Now, what we've discovered is that when
you, manipulate this data the right way, when you look at it. You can make, you can have insights that you wouldn't
have if you had a much smaller data set. So, you can learn lots of nuance
things from this very large data and then you can use that to
make a better product. So there's a capability that's
only emerged very recently. With the internet, but
also the scale of the internet. Probably in the last few years. So it's a new field. I don't know how to clearly define
exactly what skills you need. That is still evolving. But what we are looking for is people who
can handle these large data sets, right. Now terabyte is your atomic unit. Data sets are much larger than that. You want to be able to look at
those data sets, understand them, make insightful observations with them,
build systems around them. And in my case, build a closed loop. So when you look at these
large datasets look at how people have responded to specific
documents we've shown them. And then, if you've responded well
to a document we've shown you. It means that next time we should
show the same document to, you know,
to the next user in the same context. So, those are the insights
you only get with big data. Again, multi terabytes of data, you know very complicated large systems,
all distributed systems all cloud based. And on the value side, you know when
you have such a large data set when you make a small improvement it's
actually a big improvement. Because it gets multiplied by a zillion
users, so very valuable yeah. If you think about Moore's Law. If you think about how our
data centers are scaling. You can be sure that things
are going to grow at least 10x in the next five years and
at least 100x in the next ten years. So we'll have that many more computers and
networks will be that much faster. Maybe we'll have that many more color and
so on and so forth. [COUGH] So another way to think about is,
when I said that you know, terabyte is kind of the atomic unit, maybe it'll increasingly be a parrabyte
that will be the atomic unit. And I don't see I, I see the focus being more on distributed
systems than on single computers. That the single computers have their
own constraints and their limitations. But distributive systems
seem easier to scale out. So, you know,
where we're running jobs with 10 or 20 machines today,
maybe 100 machines today. Maybe be running them at
1,000 machines down the road. I also think many of these primitives
that you've been teaching your students about will continue to mature. To become more powerful, become more
efficient, move higher up in the stack. And as that happens, I think they'll
become more accessible to people as well. And so, we'll see more development there. So the way I hope it will play
out is that is the following. Within a data center we tend not to
worry so much about disconnections. Because that's much more reliable and
trustworthy. It's when you run across data centers,
when somebody does something crazy to your wire that's connecting
one data center to the other. That you really suffer from
these kinds of problems. Now once upon a time people wondered
about insider data center too. So you've already seen a little
bit of evolution there where. We tend not to worry so
much when inside a data center. I think that it boils down,
to some extent, at least, to how much you're willing to invest. If you're willing to put in a more robust
network, it'll cost you a little bit more. But it makes everything simpler for you. So, the infrastructure providers,
I think, should be thinking about this. It's worth investing that extra bit. So that your programmers
don't have to think about it. Another way to think about it
is that distributed systems does not come naturally to most people. And when it does, we all make mistakes. I certainly make my, my own fair set of mistakes when I don't
plan for a certain kind of failure. And I have a PhD in behavior, right? So, these mistakes can be very,
very expensive. You know, you have some inconsistency in,
say, a bank and you lose money. We should think like
the compiler guys did. They said, you know,
let's lose a little bit. Let's pay up, let's make the platform
more expensive if that's what it takes. But make the programming parameters
simpler for our programs. And that's where I, I hope we will go. I hope we'll have more reliable networking
that you can trust more and more. And that, increasingly we'll be
able to think about programming in a strongly consistent environment. And I think everybody
will be happy with that. So actually, I have something
personal to share with you. I reach my ten year anniversary
at Google in about two weeks. >> Nice.
>> Thank you. And there's a reason for it- it's because I've had
a really really good time. It's a fantastic work environment. It was a fantastic work
environment when I started, you know,
a little bit before Google's IPO. But, in my mind, things haven't
changed a whole lot, since then. Even though the,
the company's grown about 25 fold. It's still very much
a bottom's up environment, where an individual can, is empowered,
and can make a difference. It's still very much a,
an environment that is based on data. So, it's not really your opinion
that counts, as much as you know, gather the data, get the evidence,
and then work with the evidence. That makes it a less, much less of
a conflict environment than when you have two opinions that you can't resolve. It's also an environment where people,
very, very hard, to hire, you know,
very strong people. So, I personally find it very exciting,
when I come in, I'm dealing with, you know, the best and
the brightest in the world. [MUSIC]