[MUSIC] So in the next series of lectures
we'll be discussing a variety of peer-to-peer systems that came
out of academic research. Some of these systems have
been deployed in the wild. The first system we'll study in somewhat
of detail is Chord, which arguably was one of the first few peer-to-peer
systems to be designed from academia. And it's also interesting because
it has several concepts and techniques that are widely used
in today's key value storage and NoSQL storage systems, which are very
popular in cloud computing today. So a lot of you might be familiar with
the data structure called a hash table. A hash table is a data structure
typically maintained inside one running process on one machine,
which allows you to insert, look up, and delete objects with unique keys. So you can perform these operations in
essentially order 1 time or constant time. And a hash table essentially
stores these objects in buckets based on a hash of the key, and
this allows you to look up and perform other operations like insert and
delete fairly quickly on each key. A distributed hash table, also known as
a DHT, is a similar data structure except that it runs in a distributed system
rather than in a single process. Again, objects here are files and
files have unique keys. Maybe the file name is the key. However, instead of storing
the objects into buckets, you store the objects at nodes or
hosts or machines in a cluster. And again, the cluster might be
distributed out throughout the world. Similar to the regular hash table, you have some concerns in
the distributed hash table. One is load balancing. You want each node or each host to have about the same number
of objects stored on it as everyone else. You don't want some hosts overloaded
with objects while others have far fewer objects. However, unlike the hash table,
where you can't lose a bucket but still have another, in a distributed
hash table you could lose a node but still have another around. So fault tolerance becomes a concern here,
which means essentially that you want to make sure that even though some
of the nodes might fail or might just leave the system due to churn,
you don't want to lose any objects. Just like a regular hash table, you want
to have efficient lookups and inserts and maybe perhaps even delete operations. And finally, you want to have locality,
which essentially means that you want the messages that are transmitted among
the clusters to be transmitted preferably among nodes that are close by in
the underlying network topology or in terms of the Internet
distance underneath. So Napster, Gnutella, and FastTrack
systems that we've just discussed so far are all kind of
distributed hash tables. But they're not really because they don't
really try to optimize the insert, lookup, and delete times,
as we'll see on the next slide. Chord is one of the first peer to peer
systems which tries to directly address this problem and tries to bring the
insert, delete, and lookup time down low enough that we can claim that it is, in
fact, a DHT or a distributed hash table. So here is how Napster and
Gnutella compare along three metrics, in terms of memory, both at the client and
at the server if applicable, and the lookup latency and
the number of messages for a lookup. So let's look at Napster here. Napster, at the client, essentially does
not store too much information other than the files that have been uploaded by
the user, so we'll discount that. But the only other information stored
is the address of the server or servers that it is talking to. However, at the server,
if there are N clients in the system and each one is uploading some constant
number of files, the server store directory information, which turns
out to be order and information. Essentially this means that it is linear
in the number of clients in the system. The lookup latency is essentially
just one round-trip time. Ignoring the time for
the servers to look up their internal ternary tree is just order 1. The number of messages for a lookup is also order 1,
because it's just one round-trip time. However, the server load is fairly high. It's order N. For Gnutella, however,
where you don't have servers and you only have this overlay graph,
the memory might be as high as order N. If the client does not have a limit
on the number of neighbors, then you could have peers that have
order N immediate one-hop neighbors in the underlying Gnutella overlay. The lookup latency would be as high as
order N in the case of a degenerate Gnutella topology that
essentially looks like a line. So you have one Gnutella
topology where all the nodes are joined in one straight line,
and you have a file that is
located only at one end of the entire topology, so
the file f is located here. And the query for it starts from here. So there's only one copy of the file. And because this is order N or N minus 1 links, essentially you have
a lookup latency that is order N. And so the number of messages for
the lookup is also 2 times N minus 1, which essentially means
that it's order N as well. So order N is a fairly large number,
especially when you're considering millions of nodes in the system, and
you really want to do better than this. And that's where Chord comes into play. It essentially makes all of these,
the memory, the lookup latency, and the number of messages for
a lookup order log N on expectation. Why is log N nice? Well, log N is nice because for practical
purposes, it's almost as good as constant. If we are taking, say, log base 2,
log base 2 of 1,000 is 10, log base 2 of 1 million is 20,
log base 2 of 1 billion is only 30. And when you consider the number of
IPv4 addresses, that's just 2 power 32, the log base 2 of that is just 32. So even though it's not really constant,
for practical purposes it's
considered to be a constant. Any case,
we won't push that under the carpet, we'll still refer to that as log N. So how does Chord achieve this? Let's look at that in
a little bit of detail. Little bit of history of Chord, so Chord was developed by researchers
from both Berkeley and MIT. Essentially Chord uses a technique
where each of the nodes in the peer-to-peer overlay selects its
neighbors in an intelligent fashion. Earlier Gnutella nodes essentially
selected their neighbors based on metrics like number of files shared,
number of kilobytes shared. And essentially,
they use the ping and pong messages. Here there are certain rules
that the nodes use to decide who their neighbors are. So we'll discuss the rules
over the next few slides. So Chord uses what is known
as consistent hashing. Consistent hashing has
different interpretations. I'll give one interpretation here and
the more popular interpretation later on. So consistent hashing basically means
that you take a peer's IP address and port number, which uniquely does
identify it, and you apply a well-known hash function such as the SHA-1 function,
which stands for secure hash algorithm. This is a well-known
cryptographic function. The output of this function
is a 160 bit string. No matter how large its input is,
its output is always 160 bits. And the nice thing about the hash function
is that if you run this hash function on the same input, no matter where you're
running it, no matter which host you're running it on, you're going to
get the same 160 bit output. So you take this 160 bit output and
you truncate it to m bits, where m is a system parameter. And this gives you a peer id,
which is essentially an m bit string, which is an integer between 0 to 2
power m minus 1, both inclusive. Now you can hash multiple
peers' IP addresses, address comma port number
of pairs using this. If m is large enough,
then the conflicts become very unlikely. You're not guaranteed to
not have conflicts, but they're very unlikely as
long as m is large enough. Essentially you want 2 power m to be much
greater than the total number of nodes or holes in your system. Essentially what this means is that
you can draw a circle which consists of 2 power m logical points running
from 0 to 2 power m minus 1. And if you have a set of nodes,
you hash each of these nodes, and you put them on the corresponding
hashed peer ID on this point. So, when you hash it, and
then you truncate it in bits, you get a number that is a peer ID. So, this node over here
has a peer ID of 16 or here when you hash the type port
number and so, we'll call it as N16. Similarly there is another
node with a peer ID of 32, another node with a peer ID of 45,
and so on and so forth. There are six nodes in
this particular cluster. In this system here we are using m equals
7 which means that these numbers run from 0 to 127 over here which
is the last point before the 0. Now, this is a ring and it loops around. So, at the point to the clockwise of
127 is 0 and then, you have 1 and so on and so forth. Now what are the neighbors
that the peers maintain? The first type of neighbors that the peers
maintain, as shown on this figure, are successors. Every node knows its immediate
clock-wise successor in the ring. So 16 knows about the IP address and
port number of 32, so it can send messages directly to it. 32 knows about the IP
address in port number of 45, can send messages directly to it,
and so on and so forth. Once again, 112 knows about the IP
address and port number of 16, so it can send messages directly to it,
and that completes the ring. Peer pointers are just
the successors in each node. Similarly you can have predecessors, where
each node knows its counter-clockwise, or anti-clockwise neighbor, in the ring. For most practical purposes,
caller only uses predecessors. That's the first kind of peer pointer. The second kind of peer pointer
which is somewhat complex is called the finger tables. But this is really useful to
route your queries very quickly. Now, in a system where you are using m,
the node has m finger table. So let say we have m equals 7 and we have
finger tables running from 0 through six. So that's run from 0 to m minus 1. Here is a rule for the finger table. The i finger table and
the peer that has peer ID n, is the first peer that
has ID immediately at or to the clockwise of n + 2 power i but
then, taking modular 2 power m. So, let's do the exercise for node N80. The value of N for 80 is just 80, right? So that's well known. So, let's say i equals 0. The 0 finger table at node N80 which is
this one over here, how did we get 96? So, 80 + 2 power 0,
n + 2 power i, that's 81, and so that's a point somewhere
here on the ring, right? The node immediately to
the clockwise of that, is 96, N96. And that's why we say that N96 is,
in fact, the zero-th finger table entry, at N80. So, N80 knows about N96 IP address and
port number, because it's zero-th finger table entry. Similarly, when you said i equals 1,
you get 80 + 2 power 1, that's 82. Again, already made it and
the clockwise of it is 96. And keep on going that way
until you reach i equals 4. When you have 80 + 2 power 4,
or 96 and again, that is 96, because 96 is at n + 2 power i. Now when you have i equals 5,
that's 80 + 2 power 5, that's 80 + 32 or a 112. And that gives you 112 as the fifth
finger table entry at node N80. Now instead of having 112, if you had for
instance a 113 and 113 over here then N113 would have been the fifth finger
table entry at this, at node N80 right? So, you are searching at n + 2 power i or
immediately to the clockwise of it. Now, coming to i equals 6 similarly n
plus 2 power 6 is 80 plus 2 power 6, that's 80 plus 64 that's 144. Let me right this down here. So that's 144 but
you need to now take modular 2 for m because 144 doesn't appear on the ring. Right, so you need to take 144 mod 128. And that essentially is 16. Right and so, you have this point
on the ring over here which is this point here and so, N16 becomes
the sixth finger table entry at node 80. So, one of the things you'll notice
here is that as you go along the ring, as you increase the value of i, the distance from one finger table
entry to the next doubles okay? And there's a reason for this, we want
to be using these for our searches, so that the searches are fast,
so that they are log in. And you'll see that in just a little bit. So that's how we place nodes on the ring. How do we place files, how would
we decide where files get placed? So unlike Napster Gnutella where clients
told their own files, and don't upload them by default, here instead find the
store in specific notes based on the same rules if your using for
placing the servers on the ring. In other words you take the filing, which we assume to be unique
across the entire system. You apply the same hash function to it,
the SHA-1 simple hash algorithm one. And get 160 bit string. Then, you truncate it again,
just like you did for peer ids, and then you map this file
onto a point in the right. Okay, so,
going back to the previous figure, the file might map to,
say, point 34, right. That's somewhere over here. Then the file is stored at the first peer
that is immediately to the clockwise, or right, of that point. So again, you need to take more mod 2
power m, so you wrap around the ring. So, for instance, if I have a file
name that's cn.com/index.html, this maps to a key, say 42. Once you hash and truncate it, that's
going to be stored at the first peer that is immediately to the right of 42,
which in our previous example would be 45. So here, notice that I'm
assuming unique files names and I'm using the URL as a unique file name. This is kind of intentional here. Typically, peer-to-peer systems that
have been developed in the wild are used to exchange MP3 and MPEG files,
but this is not a limiting factor. You can use peer-to-peer systems to
develop other applications such as cooperative web caching,
where client browsers across a large population of clients share their
web results with each other. So they have faster browsing because
you're able to fetch pages that have been fetched already by another
client that's near to you. In that case the URL's become
the name of the particular object and the objects here
are the webpages themselves. This essentially what I'm trying to
say here is peer review systems can be used for storing any kind of object,
no matter what kind of objects they are. As long as the objects have a unique
name in this particular case. So the most popular notion of consistent
hashing essentially says that with K keys and in the system and N peers in the
system, each peer will store about order, will store order keys over N keys. Okay, when I say order, O(K/N),
it just means that the number of keys at a peer is less than c times K over N for
some constant c with a high probability. And essentially this means that you have
good load balance across the different tiers in your system or
the different nodes in your system. Remember that this is what load balancing
was one of our goals when we started out. So, we still haven't talked about
how the rest of the system works. So once again, pictorially here is where the file
with key K42 would be stored at N45. I mean, if here the clockwise of maps. How the search work, okay, so
that's the next thing we need to discuss. So suppose N80 wants to search for
cnn.com/index.html, the first thing it does is that hashes
it and trunks it to embeds, gets 42. Now it knows that it needs to route
to the point 42 on the ring, or rather to the point that is
immediately to the north, that is immediately to
the clockwise of 42. How does it do this? Here is a search algorithm, and
this is applied recursively. So at node N, right now N is just 80,
when you have a query that is destined for key k, in this case k is 42. You forward the key to
the largest successor or finger table entry, essentially your
largest neighbor are, when I say largest it actually means it's the most to
the right wrapping around the ring. That is still to the left of K. Okay, if non exist then you
send the quality of successor. The second line ensures that even if
the finger table entries are wrong, then [INAUDIBLE] present,
then as long as the successors are correct you end up routing the query
to the correct server eventually. It might take a long time. It might take n hops in the worst case,
but you end up routing it to the right way. So let's ignore that same part for now but essentially at N80 remember that the finer
table entries an 96, 112, and 16. So the one among them that is
the farthest to the right, the farthest away clockwise from N80
that is still to the left of 42 is 16. That's why N80 will
forward the query to N16. When N16 received this, it does likewise. It calculates among it's neighbors
which are its successors and finger table entries, which is, the most
to right, but still to the left of 42. And you'll notice that 16 will
have 32 as a finger table entry because essentially,
16 plus 2 power of 4 is 32. But 16 plus 2 power 5 is 16 plus 32
that's 48 which means that the fifth, the next finger table entry
after 32 at 16 is N80, which means that 16 does not
even know about N45's existence. And so 16 has only two choices,
32 or 80 to forward the 32 and since 32 is to the left or counterclockwise
of 42, it forwards it to 32. 32 tries to do similarly but it doesn't have a neighbor that is to the
left of 42 so it simply forwards it to its successor and that's where
the second line comes into play. And that makes its way to 45. Whenever a node receives a query in
relation to this algorithm, it also checks its local files to see if any of those
files match, and in this case, 45 matches. And it can respond back directly
to anything with the response. Now in this case,
I've drawn three arrows here. Each of these are the hops
that the query takes. These hops are essentially RPCs or
remote procedure calls. This is a well known abstraction
in discriminate systems. So I claim that this algorithm
takes O(log(N)) time. Why is that?
Well, essentially what happens is that if
you consider the points on the ring, whenever query takes a step, whenever it
takes a hop from one pier to another. The distance between where
the query is and the ring and the point where the key is,
this dotted line, that distance goes on by
a factor of at least two. because as you do I'm
saying this is where so this is where the query currently is and
this is where the key is on the ring. Then if you consider the second
half of this particular segment that's where the query's
going to jump to next. Again why is this, this is again you
can prove this by contradiction. If this was not true, if the query jump to
the first half of the segment over here. Then we can show because of the doubling
of the finger table entries that there's going to be at least one
finger table entry in the second half. Which this node must know about and
you reach a contradiction. Essentially because the finger table
entries double this node over here. It's going to have at least one neighbor
in the second segment which is to the left of Key K. It's going to have at least one finger
table entry in the second segment which is to the left of Key K and
it's going to forward that to that one. So essentially, after log and forwardings
the distance to the key increases by a factor of two power log N and
that's just N. because we're taking log base 2 over here,
and so the distance between where the queries and where the keys in terms of points on
the ring, is 2 power N divided by N. So essentially, this means that now
even if you use the successors in this small section of the ring which
has two power m divided by n points. You want to have the query
reach the eventual key. But this using balls and bins you can show
that in the small segment of the ring. There is only order log N appears
with high probability, and so even if you use successors in
this small section of the ring. Once you have done these log N
forwardings, you can only hit another order log N peers with hyper mobility,
so that's log N plus log N, which is still order log N hops for the
entire equation to reach where the key is. Now the algorithm that
I described to you so far is essentially it's not just for
searching. So, so far we've assumed that it's for
searching but you can essentially use that
algorithm to route to any key. And the routing message is independent
of what operation you're doing on it. So you might have the routing message say,
hey, I want to insert this key. Or I want to delete this key. Or I want to update or look up this key. It doesn't matter. So routing essentially is the building
block that we have discussed so far. And it can be used for any of these
distributed hash table options, or DHT options. Now somebody said that, and were shown that time to do a routing
message to any key is order log in. But this is true only the finger tables
and the successor entries are correct. When could they be wrong,
well they could be wrong when you have a peers leave the system whether
they fail or whether they out. And the corresponding successors and finger table entries
have not been updated. [MUSIC]