In this next series of lectures, uh, we'll see, uh,
the consensus problem, which is one of the most important distributed
computing problems. Uh, we'll see what
the problem is, uh, we'll see why it is,
um, hard to solve, and then we'll, uh, try to see
a few solutions, uh, uh, to it. So, uh, you might have seen that
a lot of wendors, uh, publish, uh, their, uh, solutions, their software, their products, their services as having
several 9's of reliability. Some vendors might say we
have five-9's of reliability. Essentially this means that, uh, their service is available 99.999% of the time. Uh, seven 9's would have
seven 9's in there. but none of the vendors ever, uh, promise 100% reliable services or products. This is not because, uh,
of the fallibility of, uh, of hu-of human beings or, uh, the fact that today's
companies are not good enough. Uh, the-the main reason for this is that a lot of these services, especially the
distributed services, uh, need to solve a problem known as consensus, and it turns out that consensus is impossible to solve under certain, uh, system models and under certain situations. Uh, so we'll see in this lecture
series what exactly consensus is and why is this, uh,
impossibility even there, and how we can get around it. So here are a set of problems that, uh, many, uh, distributed computing, um, scenarios need to tackle, many cloud computing environments need to tackle. The first is a group of servers
that are trying to make sure that all of them receive the same updates in the same order as each other. Uh, these might be the servers
in a storage system that are receiving rights,
uh, from a set of clients and they want to make sure
that all these, uh, rights are reliably received
by all the servers and they are also
received in the same order. Um, a group of servers that is
trying to, uh, keep local lists, uh, membership lists
that know about each other, and when any one, any of the servers leaves
the group or fails from the group, uh, all the, uh, membership lists are updated simultaneously. A third scenario is, uh,
one where a group of servers wants to elect
a leader among them and then let everyone else
in the group know who the leader is. And finally, the fourth scenario
is one where all these servers want to, uh, obtain mutually
exclusive access to a resource, so when one of the servers
is accessing the resource, none of the others are able to access
the resource at the same time. Think of this as locking. So these are four, uh, classic
and very import- classical and very
important problems in distributed, uh, systems, um,
and they have names. The first one is called
Reliable, uh, Multicasts, uh, the second is called Membership
or Failure Detection, the third
is called Leader Election, and the fourth
is called Mutual Exclusion. Um, you would have seen or you
will see each of these problems elsewhere in this
particular course, but for now what
is relevant to us is that all of these problems
are directly related to the consensus problem. So what really is common
among these problems? Well let's just call each
server a process, okay? So think of the daemon
that is running, uh, at each of these servers, and so, uh, when I
say a group of processes, I essentially mean
a group of processes communicating over a network. These processes
might be anywhere; they might be on a few servers, they might be on a large number
of, uh, servers. Uh, all these examples that we
saw, uh, just now were examples of groups of process attempting
to coordinate with each other and reach agreement
about something, um, either the ordering
or the reliability of messages, or the up/down status
of a suspected fail process in a failure detector example, or who the leader is
in the leader election example, or who has access
to the critical resource in the mutual exclusion example. So all of these are related
to the consensus problem, which essentially tries to have
a group of servers coordinate with each other and agree
on the value of something. So what really is consensus? Formally, uh, we
have N processes. Um, each process p
has two variables. These variables only have
bit values, um, so, uh, the input variable called xp
is initially either 0 or 1. This is the processes-that
particular process's piece, um, uh, contribution or
proposal, uh, for the group. And each process p also
has an output variable, uh, called as yp, which is initially,
um, undecided, or what is known as just b,
it's undecided. And, uh, the concern
it is that p can change, uh, the output variable
at most once. Once it is changed, once it is
set to either 0 or 1, it can't be changed afterwards. So the problem that we have,
the consensus problem, is to design
a distributed protocol so that at the end
of that protocol, um, uh, all the processes decide the same value
for their output variables. So either all the processes set
their output variables to be 0's, so you have
an all-0's outcome, or all the processes set
their output variables to be 1, so you have an all-1's outcome. So why is this problem so,
uh, challenging at all? Well, uh,
before we go into that, a little bit of, um, summary, or a different way
of putting the same problem, so every process
contributes a value, and the goal is to have
all the processes deciding, uh, the same value, whatever
value it is, either 0 or 1, uh, but once a process
makes a decision, it cannot change that decision. And the reason
for this is typically because the decision
is communicated up to the application, and the application might
take certain actions based on that decision. Now in addition to the, uh,
main requirements for consensus that we saw
in the previous slide, in practice there might be
a few other constraints. Uh, they are validity,
integrity and non-triviality. Validity says that if everyone
in the group, all the processes, propose the same value, say all
of them propose 0, then, um, the group should decide it is 0. Alternately, if all
the processes propose a 1, then the group should
decide a 1. Integrity, the second
condition, says that, um, the decided value must have been proposed by some process, uh, and this is of course related to, uh, validity. Um-uh, some process
must have proposed a 0 value for it to be decided
by the entire group. Non-triviality says that there is at least one
initial system state that leads to, uh,
an all-0's outcome, and at least one initial state that leads
to an all-1's outcome. Uh, if you didn't have this
non-triviality condition, then essentially you could solve
consensus by saying "Hey, everyone just set
your output variables to be 0 "and we are done
because we have consensus," but then that would mean that you always decide 0
all the time, and that's not really
a practical or useful distributed protocol. You want to decide 0 or 1, uh, depending on what's going
on in the group. So, uh, the consensus problem
is important, uh, because, uh,
several important, uh, distributed computing problems are, uh, related to it. They are either
equivalent to consensus, which means that, um, they are in fact the same problem, if you can solve consensus, you can solve
the other problem, and if you can solve
the other problem you can solve consensus. Or in some cases, uh, the distributed computing problems are harder than, uh, consensus. So failure detection, which, uh,
we have discussed, uh, earlier, uh, is related to consensus in the sense that it
is equivalent to consensus. So perfect failure detection, uh, that, uh, always detects
failures, uh, all the time and never makes any mistakes
about detections is, uh, equivalent to consensus, which means that if you had
a protocol to solve consensus, you could design
a perfect failure detector and vicey versa. Leader election, um, where
you want to elect a leader and want-want to, uh, have everyone
in the group know about it is also, um, equivalent
to consensus. Agreement where you want to decide on not just a bit value but, um, maybe an integer value, um, or something more complex is actually harder than consensus. Uh, if you had
a solution to agreement, you would be able
to solve consensus. So before, um, uh,
we solve consensus, uh, we need to ask what
is the system model under which the consensus
problem is being solved. Uh, this is a practice that I would
like you to develop whenever someone gives you
a problem statement. The first thing
you should figure out is what are the assumptions
or what is the system model under which we are trying
to solve the problem. So there are two more, uh, most
popular, um, uh, system models in distributed systems;
the synchronous system model and the asynchronous, uh,
distributed system model. Let's look at each of these. The synchronous distributed
system model, the one, uh, without the "a," um, has bounds on everything. It has a bound
on how long a message takes to be delivered
at a recipient process. As long as the sender
and recipient, uh, processes are alive, the message will be delivered
within that bounded time, and that bound is a global bound across the entire
distributed system. The second is that processes, uh, local clocks do not drift away from each other too much. Uh, there is an upper bound on the drift rate between
any two processes' clocks. The third is that, uh, each process has a minimum speed
and also a maximum speed at which
it executes instructions. Uh, in other words,
each step in a process takes a time that is lower bounded by a well-known value, and is also upper-bounded
by a well-known value. Uh, examples of synchronous
distributed systems are collections of processors that,
uh, share a communication bus and are on the same
motherboard-for instance, a multiprocessor system,
one that you might buy, uh, from a well-known company, uh,
one of these computers today. Uh, or even a supercomputer,
uh, machine, um, is an example of the
synchronous distributed system. The asynchronous distributed
system model, on the other hand, does not have any
bounds on anything. It does not have bounds on how
fast or slow processes are. Processes might be
arbitrarily fast; they might be arbitrarily slow. A process might execute
an instruction, um, every nanosecond, and another process
might execute an instruction every 3 years or
every million years. You don't know how
slow processes are. Uh, processes' clocks can drift
away from each other arbitrarily fast or slow, uh,
and also a message might take arbitrarily long, uh,
to reach its recipient. A message that you send
might be delivered within the next nanosecond
or picosecond, or it might, uh, take forever to be delivered
at, uh, the recipient process. And the asynchronous
distributed system model is an interesting model because a lot of the very
widely-used distributed systems, um, uh, adhere to this. So the internet is an example of an asynchronous
distributed system, as are wireless ad-hoc
networks and sensor networks. Obviously, the asynchronous
distributed system model is more challenging in, uh, in terms of a model
in which to solve problems, compared to the
synchronous system model, because there are
no bounds on anything. And so if you
are able to solve a problem in the asynchronous
distributed system model, you can be sure
that it will also work, the same protocol will also work in the synchronous
distributed system model. However, the reverse
is not true. If you, uh, solve a problem in the synchronous
distributed system model with the well-known bounds, it doesn't mean, uh, that, uh, the same
protocol will work in the asynchronous distributed system model as well. This is why a lot
of the distributed systems and cloud computing
literature focuses on the asynchronous
s-system model where there are
no bounds on anything. So in the synchronous system
model, the consensus problem, which we discussed,
is in fact solvable, and we'll see a solution to that, um,
in this lecture series. In the asynchronous distributed
system model, however, consensus is
impossible to solve. And what this means is that, uh, whatever protocol
or algorithm you suggest which claims to solve consensus, there is always a worst-case possible execution scenario where some processes fail and, uh, some messages are
delayed just the wrong amount that will always prevent the
system from reaching consensus where everyone decides
the same value. This is of course a very
powerful impossibility result. Um, this is sort of like
the Np completeness,um, uh, uh, equivalent, uh,
in distributed systems, um, and, uh, for those
of you who are interested, there is an optional optional lecture in this series which will cover,
uh, the FLP proof that pr-that shows that, uh,
the, uh, consensus problem is impossible to solve
in asynchronous systems. Subsequently, several safe
and probabilistic solutions have become quite popular. This includes
a solution of Paxos, which you'll also see later
in this lecture series. So in the next lecture we'll,
um, just try to solve consensus. We'll see, uh,
how do you solve consensus in the synchronous system model.