[MUSIC] At this point, in the course as we begin to wrap up the
part one of the cloud computing concepts, we are essentially taking a pause,
in the concepts that we have seen so far. Hopefully what you've seen so
far has been a good sampling of what underlies to these cloud
computing systems. You've seen a little bit of
distributive algorithms, and, in the second part of the cloud computing
concepts course, we'll continue our, tool. What you've learned so far has been
an introduction, to the idea of cloud computing concepts including mapreduce and
key-value stores, many classical precursors and widely used algorithms that
underly today's cloud computing systems. And also we have started to
look at classical algorithms, as, the end of the course came up. In the second part of the course,
we'll continue with, the same thread. We'll continue looking at
more classical algorithms. You also looked at some
interviews with managers and researchers from industry
as well as academia. What's coming up after the pause in C
three part two, the second part of this course, is a more classical
algorithms including leader election, mutual exclusion and scheduling. Discussion of scalability,
how can you support millions of clients? How can you support hundreds or
thousands of servers, replicating data? We look at new trending areas
such as stream processing, distributive graph processing. As well as,
wisdom on structure of networks. As well as exciting ideas
like sensor networks. And we'll look at a variety of ideas that
have, some relation to cloud computing, including distributed file systems, distributed shared memory,
security, and we'll look at some case studies of what happens
when things go wrong in data centers. And of course we continue interviews with, our friends in academia
as well as industrial. The goal of, C3-Part 2, which is coming
up, remains the same as, Part 1. We continue to look at the internals of
cloud computing, meaning the listable systems and algorithms that underly
to these cloud computing systems. We'll discuss concepts, techniques,
and industry systems that use these concepts and techniques,
including open-source industry systems. Again the format of C3 Part 2 should be
familiar to you, it is just like C3 part one, you have two homeworks, and one exam
and an optional programming assignment. While in C3 Part 1, you will build
a membership protocol in C3 Part 2, you will be building a key
value store inside an emulator. But one again, just like part one, the
emulator is better so that the code can be taken as is, and ported easily
over a reall distributor cluster. C3 Part 1, that you have been involved in
so far, is a prerequisite for C3 Part 2. Which means that you are perfectly pleased
to move forward to C3 Part 2 right now. You have all the necessary,
background that, you need to actually
take C three part two. Cloud computing continues to
be an exciting media, and, one that is dynamically changing and
continuously changing. So I invite you to continue this,
journey with me as we move forward and continue our journey,
through the landscape. I'm looking forward to seeing you again
in Cloud computing concepts Part 2. [MUSIC]