In this lecture and the next we'll look
at reliable multicast. So what is reliability? Uh, a multicast protocol that
is reliable, uh, loosely means that every process in the group
receives all the multicasts. Now, reliability is orthogonal
to ordering that we have seen, um, uh, so far, which means that you can implement a reliable multicast that is FIFO ordered, or you can implement
a reliable multicast that is causal ordered, or you can implement
a reliable multicast protocol that is total ordered, or a reliable hybrid, uh,
ordering protocol as well. Okay, so reliability, what we are discussing
is completely orthogonal to, uh, the ordering,
uh, that you have seen earlier in this lecture series. So coming back
to the definition, uh, reliable multicast loosely says that all the processes in the group receive multicasts. However, when you have
process failures, you don't necessarily know
what the failed or the faulty processes uh, did, so the definition becomes
a little bit vague. So we need
to spruce up the definition. We need all
the correct processes, meaning all the non-faulty process in the group, to receive
the same set of multicasts as all the other
processes, okay? So faulty processes are, uh, not
necessarily, uh, predictable, and we don't necessarily know
what happened to them, so we won't worry about them. We were seeing is that
in a single run of the system, uh, at the end of the run when you have a small set
of correct processes, uh, which are-which
did not fail, uh, the set of multicasts received at any one of those processes in that small set is the same as the set
of multicasts received at any other process
in that same set. So, uh, essentially,
reliable multicast sends that- says that all the multicasts
that are sent to the group are either received
at, um, all the processes that are correct or none of
the processes that are correct. That's what reliability
really means. Uh, so let's, uh, see how to
implement reliable multicasts. Let's assume
that underneath we have as a, um, uh, building block
a reliable unicast protocol such as, say, TCP, which allows
us to send point-to-point or process-to-process messages
in a reliable, uh, way, uh,
that is also, say, ordered. It-the ordering is really
not important to us. All that is important to us is that when we send a unicast message from one process to a single recipient process,
it is delivered. So the first-cut way to
implement the reliable multicast is the following. Uh, the sender of the multicast
process runs in a For-loop where it, uh, goes through, uh, all the addresses of the other, uh, processes
in the group, and to each process it sends
a reliable unicast message, uh, that contains
a multicast message. Well, this, uh, works as long
as the sender is alive. Uhm, uh, if the sender
is alive, in fact, uh, all the correct processes will receive
that multicast message. However, if the sender dies
halfway through the For-loop, then you are in trouble because, uh, some correct processes
in the system would have received
the multicast message M, but the others that, uh,
were not touched by the For loop before the sender's failure, uh, would not have received
the same multicast message M. And, so this is not really
a-a multicast protocol that satisfies reliability,
so we eliminate this. So how do you really implement
reliable multicast protocol? Well, you can implement- you can ex- you can extend the,
uh, exa-the protocol that you saw
in the previous slide, and, um, uh, make it reliable. How do you do this? Well, you do this by having the receivers
also help the sender process. Uh, once again, in this,
uh, new multicast protocol that is reliable, the sender process
sequentially through a for loop sends a reliable unicast, uh, to each
of the group, uh, processes. However, when a receiver
receives a multicast message M for the first time, it, uh,
also, uh, uh, goes through a for loop where it sends out
the multicast message M to all other processes
in the group. In other words, if for instance
if all the, uh, processes in the group are non-faulty, then you end up with N copies
of the multicast being sent, one by each of the processes
in the group. Of course this could
be fairly inefficient. This is not
the most efficient protocol, but it is-it is reliable. Uh, it says that, uh, if at least one correct process receives a multicast message M, then every other correct process will also have received that same multicast message M. The proof of this
is by contradiction. Suppose we have
two correct processes Pi and Pj. These are the two processes
in the small set that are, uh, non-faulty
at the end of the, uh, run. Uh, and, uh, say a multicast
message M was sent to the group and Pi received M but Pj
did not receive M, right? This is the contradiction
which says that this protocol does not, uh,
guarantee reliability. Well, then when Pi received
the multicast message M the first time, it would have,
uh, gone through a for loop, and because Pi did not fail, the for loop
would have touched, uh, Pj, and Pi would have directly sent
a reliable unicast message to Pj and Pj would have received
the multicast message M, okay? This means
that we have a contradiction which means
that our assumption is not true, and so, uh, the, uh,
opposite must be true, which is that,
uh, any correct- any pair of correct processes would have received the same set of multicast, uh,
messages, um, M. Okay, so this just shows
that our extended protocol, though slightly
inefficient, wasteful, still does, uh, preserve reliability in, uh, the system. Now of course there is a variety
of other protocols that are- that have been invented, uh, since this early
classical protocol that are reliable
and far more efficient. In the next lecture we'll see
how to combine fault-tolerance as well as, uh,
multicast, uh, reliability.