[MUSIC] Hi everyone, so today we're going to
discuss group membership and its need in datacenters and
in cloud environments. So let's start with a scenario where
you've been put in charge of a datacenter, perhaps that's your new job. And your manager tells you, no, we don't
have any failures in our data center. Would you believe your manager? And if you didn't believe your manager,
what would be your first responsibility? Well, your first responsibility would
be to build a mechanism that detects failures of servers in your datacenter. I encourage you to think at this point
about some of the things that could go wrong if you did not
build a failure detector. And I'll come back to this
question in a couple of minutes. But why would you not
believe your manager? Well, in datacenters, failures
are the norm rather than the exception. And let's see an example
that illustrates this. Suppose the failure rate of one machine,
say the hardware, software, failure rate
is once every 10 years. This is a little bit optimistic, but
let's say it's one every 10 years, and that means it's 120 months on average. When you increase the number of machines
in your datacenter from one to 120, the mean time to failure goes
down by a factor of 120. This means that the average time
between now and the first machine, among those 120 failing, is 120 months
divided by 120 which is 1 month. This is known as the MTTF,
the mean time to failure. Still it's looking fine, but suppose you have a good scale datacenter,
12,000 servers. Then the mean time to failure goes
down by a factor of 12,000, and that turns out to be about 7.2 hours. You can imagine what happens if
I make that a 120,000 servers, it would be 0.72 hours. Essentially this means that failures
are happening almost all the time. And any system that you build that
assumes failures don't happen will not work correctly. So what are the things that could go wrong
if you didn't build a failure detector? Essentially, what you can have is you
could have data loss because some of the servers have gone down. And your software has not
detected this failure and not recovered from that failure. You could also have inconsistency in
your system which could lead to loss of revenue for your customers. And eventual shut down of your datacenter
and the services that it provides. So how do you build a failure detector? You have a couple of options,
the first option is to hire 1,000 people. Each monitoring one or
a few machines in the datacenter and reporting to you when the machine fails. The second option is to write a program or software that in a distributed manner
automatically detects failures and reports to your workstation, or
maybe even takes corrective action. Well, clearly the second approach
is more preferable because, one, it does not require you to spend
money to hire 1,000 people. Second, it's much faster, and third, it might even be able to take
corrective action upon detecting failures. So we won't use the first
option obviously, and we'll go down the path
of the second option. So our target here is any distributed
system that involves multiple members in a group. The group might be a datacenter
where we have groups of servers, the members are servers. It might be a group of servers
replicating one or more files, for instance in a peer-to-peer system. Or it might be a group of
servers running a distributed or a replicated database,
it doesn't matter what these are. The kinds of failures we're dealing with
are crash-stop or fail-stop failures. This essentially means that
once a member of the group, we'll call that member a process. Once a process fails, it basically
stops executing any instructions from its point of failure
until time infinity. It does not recover, also it does not
take any actions which deviate from the original code or
the original algorithm that you coded in. This is different from
a few other failure models, such as a crash recovery failure
model where processes can recover. The fail-stop, crash-stop failure model can be easily
changed to be a crash recovery model. When you have processes rejoin the system
with a slightly different identifier. The failure model where processes fail and
deviate from their actions, that is known as Byzantine failure model. We won't discuss that in this series of
lectures, we might discuss them later on. So essentially what you have at each
process in your group of processes is that you have a membership list here. Which maintains the list of most or all of the other processes that are currently in
your system and that have not yet failed. That means non-faulty processes. This membership list is accessed
by a variety of applications, for instance the application might be,
A gossip-based application, which you will find
elsewhere in this course. Or it might be an overlay or
a distributed hash table application, which you'll find elsewhere
in the course as well. So essentially the membership list or
accessing the membership list or even sampling the membership list is
an important building block of many distributed algorithms. So our goal is to build
the membership protocol which keeps this membership
list up-to-date. As processes join the system, the group, as they fail silently, and as they leave. The difference between failure and
leave is that a process, when it fails, it fails silently without telling anyone. However, a process leave essentially
involves it telling people and giving them time to update their
membership lists before it changes. One of the biggest challenges is that this
membership protocol has to communicate over the unreliable communication medium. Which can drop packets,
which can delay packets quite a bit. The quality of the semantics of this
list might be of different flavors. The list might be a complete list that
is consistent at all times across all the processes in the group, this is
known as strongly consistent membership. For instance, virtual synchrony, which is a well known distributed
computing paradigm, relies on this. There are also algorithms
such as gossip style, algorithms which rely on
an almost complete list. There are a variety of examples of this, some of which you will
see in this lecture. There are also other algorithms
such as SCAMP, T-MAN and Cyclon which you can look up papers for on
the web which make a partial-random list. Our focus here is on almost complete
lists because they are weakly consistent. But they're close enough to the complete
list itself that they're useful to a variety of applications. So you'll notice here that I put
two sub-protocols in the membership protocol place. One is a mechanism that detects failures, the second is a mechanism that
disseminates information about these failures after detection to
the other processes in the system. The dissemination component can also be
used to disseminate information about process joints as well as
process leaves in the system. So that was for one process pi,
however the same algorithm or the same software is running at
all the processes in your group. And this might be thousands of processes, we'll call these as
the members of the group. And remember that they're communicating
over an unreliable communication medium. The goal here is that, just suppose
we have two processes, pi and pj, and we're dealing with
crash-stop failures only. When process pj crashes,
this could be any of the process pj, some process finds out
quickly about this failure. This is the goal of the failure detector
component of the membership protocols. Now multiple processes might find out
about this failure, but we need to ensure that at least one non-faulty process
finds out about this failure. What it does, it can then use
the dissemination component to disseminate this information to
the other processes quickly. So that they get to know about this
failure and update their membership lists. So next we will discuss how to design
group membership protocol that has both the failure detector component and
the dissemination component. [MUSIC]