In this lecture we are going
to study, uh, Gnutella, which is the, um, uh, arguably the first fully distributed, uh, peer-to-peer system. So one of the problems
with Napster was the fact that the servers were maintaining
directory information and that they were,
uh, responsible for "indirect infringement," and so Gnutella's
solution to this was to eliminate
the servers altogether and instead use
the clients themselves to search and retrieve
using messages. So in effect the clients
act as servers too, or they take on some
of the responsibilities of the, uh, the servers, and so Gnutella clients are often called as "servents," which is a collage word that consists of "server"
plus "client." Uh, AOL actually released
Gnutella in 2000, uh, but realizing that there were
copyright issues with it, uh, withdrew it, but Gnutella
continued growing, and it had, uh, 88,000 users
around, uh, March 2003. Gnutella itself underwent, uh,
several revisions. Uh, we are gonna discuss the very first version
of, uh, Gnutella, uh, that was, uh, published,
uh, as tech report. So Gnutella, there
are no, uh, servers. Instead peers, uh, communicate
directly with each other. Um, peers, like in Napster,
store their own files; files do not go anywhere
by default. Ah, but peers also
store peer pointers. In other words, every peer
has one or more neighbors which are also other peers
in the system. So consider this peer over
here, it has five neighbors, uh, this, this, this,
this, and this peer. Essentially, a neighbor means
this peer knows about their IP address
and port number pairs and can send them, uh, messages using, uh, for instance, TCP. So essentially, uh, this, uh,
creates a graph among the peers; this is called an overlay graph. This is called an overlay graph because it's a graph that is overlaid on top of the internet. Uh, each of the links
in this graph, each of the edges in this graph, is essentially an internet path
in the underlying internet, but as far as the
overlay is concerned, it is, um, uh, the actual path
in the underlying internet is irrelevant. As long as the peers
can talk with each other, that's all that matters. So, um, how do I search for a
particular file, say the Beatles
"Penny Lane" file, which we searched for
in, uh, Napster earlier? Well, Gnutella routes
different messages within the overlay graph, and for this it uses five
different kinds of messages. For the search messages
which contain the key words, it uses the Query message. The QueryHit is a response to
the search, and we'll see these, uh, over the next few slides. In order to keep, uh, the list
of neighbors, uh, up to date, it uses Ping and Pong messages, and it uses a fifth kind
of message called Push, uh, for a file transfer. We'll go into the structure
of the messages now, and the protocol itself. Now, all of the fields
in the messages that I'm going to discuss are I, except IP addresses,
are in little-endian format. Um, you might have heard
of little-endian versus big-endian format. These are two different ways
of, uh, storing, say, integers in your memory. In the little-endian format,
essentially if you have a hex, which is 12345678, 78 is stored
in the lowest address byte, then 56 is stored
in the next higher address, and so on and so forth. Uh, in the big-endian format,
this would be reversed. Essentially, 12 would be stored
in the lowest address byte. So here is the header for all
the five kinds of messages in Gnutella; Query, Queryhit,
Push, Ping, and Pong. The first 16 bytes are, uh,
the ID of this transaction. This is typically
generated uniquely for every single search
from every peer. In other words, whenever your
client generates a, uh, search, it has to generate
a descriptor ID that is unique
throughout the entire system. For instance, you could, uh,
generate this by using the IP address
and port number of the client, and also an incrementing
sequence number at that client itself. This descriptor ID is useful
because the intermediate nodes can then use this
to distinguish messages that only belong
to this particular, uh, search, and not confuse it
with other searches. The next two bytes,
uh, essentially, uh, carry the type of payload, the kind of message
that this is, and this is one of five types for the five
different messages. Next you have TTL,
or "time to live." That's one byte, and then Hops, which is the number of hops that this, uh, message
has transmitted to. Whenever a message
is forwarded by a peer to its neighboring peers,
TTL is decremented by one. When the TTL hits zero, you do not
forward the message anymore. The TTL is set
to be a finite number, so that essentially a message doesn't keep circulating around the overlay
graph forever. You don't want the overlay graph
to have very old messages still going around
inside of them. The initial TTL is usually set to be somewhere
between seven and ten. The hops is also incremented every time
a message is forwarded. You might wonder, at this
point, and I'm sure you should, you're wondering, why you
need a hops when you have a TTL. Well, the reason
is the initial TTL may not be the same
at all the initial peers. Uh, some peers might choose
the initial TTL to be seven others might choose it
to be ten. In any case, most
of the protocol, uh, deviants we discussed don't really
use the Hops field; they mostly rely
on the TTL field. Finally, the message
might have a payload, which differs depending
on the kind of message it is, depending on the one
of the five kinds of messages. And so how many bytes are there
in the payload is present in the Payload
length field, so you know how far to look
for the end of the message. That being said, let's go
into the individual messages. The Query message contains, uh,
first of all the minimum speed that is requested
by the Querying peers, so if you're connected
to a, um, 100 MBps line, you might say
"Well, I need peers that are "at least 100 MBps
or at least 10 MBps," and then the search criteria,
these might be the keywords, say "Beatles Penny Lane"
that you're searching for. This is present in the Payload
portion of the previous, uh, message that I showed. But how are queries sent out? Well, let's imagine this, uh,
peer on the bottom left is the one that is trying
to search for PennyLane.mp3. It creates a Query message
which has a TTL of, say, two in this case, and it sends out,
uh, the Query message to its immediate
neighboring peers, this, uh, top left peer and also
this middle peer over here. When, um, uh, each of these
peers receives its message, it first of all searches
among its local files whether they have, um, uh,
any of their keywords matching the incoming
Query message, and also it floods out
the Query message to its immediate
neighboring peers. So this peer over here
that I'm showing, uh, floods out the Query message
to all the peers it has received except, uh-so all of its neighboring peers, uh, except the one
from which it just received, uh, the Query message, so in
this case that's four peers. This peer would have
done likewise, except that it received
the Query message, um, uh, from this other peer, so it doesn't send it, uh,
the same Query message. How does it know this? Well, the descriptor IDs
of these Query messages are the same,
and they are retained, um, as the messages transit through the overlay graph. Now, in this, um, arrow or also
in any of these arrows, the TTL of these messages is 1. So when this peer receives
a Query message, or the two Query messages, it decrements the TTL,
finds that the TTL is 0. It does not forward
the Query message anymore. So for instance, this peer over
here never receives the copy of the Query message because,
uh, all of its neighbors have already had a TTL of 0 when they received
that Query message. So the Query messages
are also TTL restricted. Finally, they
are forwarded only once, so once this peer
has forwarded a Query message, if it receives a duplicate, uh,
for instance, um, you know, this peer might receive
a duplicate from this peer, it doesn't forward
the Query message a second time. A-again, how does it know this? It knows this by,
uh, keeping track of the recent Query messages that it has forwarded, uh, and using
the descriptor ID field to find out whether or not an incoming
Query message is a duplicate. So in this way essentially
you're trying to, uh, flood out the Query messages, but not
to the entire network, only to some, uh, portion
of the overlay graph, um, uh, hopefully
a large enough portion that you'll get back
enough search results. Now, how do search
results come back? So when a peer finds that
it has some matching files which match the incoming Query's
keywords, what does it do? Well, it creates
a QueryHit message. The QueryHit message contains
the following payload. It contains
the number of hits, the number of files that match, it contains the port,
uh, and the IP address, as well as the speed
of the responding peer, this is the peer that is responding to the querying peer, and then it contains, uh, for each of the files
that match, information about that file
such as the filename, the file index,
and the file size. It might also contain
a servent ID, which essentially
is a unique identi-identifier of the responder. This might be derived
from its IP address. For most parts this
is not really used, um, uh, in the Query
and QueryHit. It might be used by the Push
message, but not really here. Now how does the QueryHit
make its way back to the querying peer? Well, QueryHits
are reverse routed. Remember we said that every peer
keeps track of, um, the recent Query messages
it has received. It also keeps track of which
of its neighboring peers it received
this Query message from. So when this peer either
generates a QueryHit message or receives a QueryHit message, it just, uh, simply, uh,
sends a QueryHit message back to the peer
from which it received the corresponding Query
message from. So this peer, uh, over here in
the, uh, top right corner, when it generates
a QueryHit message, it sends back the QueryHit
message to that peer which sent it
the corresponding Query message. This QueryHit message
that is sent back contains the same descriptor ID as the original Query message, so that, uh, the peer
that is receiving, uh, this QueryHit message knows, uh, which Query message is the corresponding matching
Query message for this QueryHit. And so, uh, in this way
the QueryHit messages make their way back
in the reverse path to the querying peer, uh, and the querying peer
now receives back all of these responses, and now it knows who are, which are all
the matching files, and it can display these
responses to the user. Now to avoid
duplicate transmissions, each peer maintains a list
of recently-received messages, uh, as we mentioned. The Query is forwarded
to all neighbors except the peer from which
you have received it, or peers from which
you may have received it. Each Query is
forwarded only once. The QueryHits
are reverse routed, uh, back to, uh, the peer from which the Query received
the same descriptor ID. And duplicates with the same
descriptor ID and payload typically, uh, Queries,
um, are, uh, dropped. Also, the overlay graph may
have changed, as we'll see soon, because some of the neighbors
may have shifted and changed, uh, in between the time that
the Query went through and, uh, until when the
QueryHit comes back. So, uh, this, in addition
to the fact that you're only maintaining some of the recently-received query messages may mean that you might receive
a QueryHit message, uh, for which you don't have
any information about a Query message with the
same matching descriptor ID. In this case, you do not flood
the QueryHit message; instead, you just drop it. Uh, this may result in some of
the, uh, responses being, uh, not shown
at the querying peer, but hopefully this is only a small portion of the total responses. So what happens when the
querying peer receives back, um, uh, the response? Essentially these are shown to,
uh, the client, and the client then, um, uh, selects one of them, depending on the, uh, bandwidth, uh, and then,
uh, the download starts. Well, how does
the download start? Well, initially the requester
or the querying peer, uh, sends an HTTP request to the responder's
IP address and port number. This is a GET http
request, as shown. It also contains, um, uh,
a connection type, which is a Keep-Alive, uh,
in this case an HTTP 1.0. It also specifies a range field. Uh, the range field
is essentially used, uh, to start partial file transfers. So for instance, if you started
to transfer a 1 MB file, and after you'd
transferred 512 KB the connection, uh, was killed for some reason, then you can trans ano-transfer- start another GET transfer by specifying the
range field that's 512 KB so that, uh, the file transfer
starts from the 512 KB, uh, onward, uh, rather than- and transfers only
the second half of the file rather than transferring
the entire file. When the responder receives
this GET message, it responds back
with an HTTP OK message, uh, with the content length,
the number of, uh, bytes, and then this
is followed immediately by packets that contain
the actual file data itself. So HTTP is a file
transfer protocol. Why the Gnutella developers
decided that-it's standard, it's well-debugged
and it's widely used, and they didn't want to reinvent a new file transfer protocol. The range field, as we
discussed, is used, uh, to support partial
file transfers so that you don't need to, uh,
restart the entire file, um, uh, transfer, uh, whenever
a connection gets dropped. Now one of the issues that
arises in the real internet is that, uh, some of these
peers are behind firewalls. A firewall is essentially used, uh, to prevent some kinds of messages,
uh, uh, from coming in. It does not, uh, prevent, uh,
messages from going out, or at least most messages
from going out, but it does prevent some
kind of messages from coming in. So if you go back, uh,
essentially, um, this HTTP message will not make its way to the responder if the responder
is behind a firewall. How do you then do
the file transfer? Well that's where the Push
message comes into play. What Gnutella does
is something very clever, which is that it uses
the overlay links themselves, remember that these edges in the overlay are already set up; they're already set up
TCP connections among, uh, the peers
or between pairs of peers. And so you can route whatever
messages you want, uh, using these links, and so that's what, uh, the, uh,
Gnutella requesting peer does. First it does try to set up
an HTTP connection to the responding peer. When it fails,
it guesses that hey, maybe the responding peer,
the yellow peer, in this case, is behind a firewall, and it routes a Push message via
the, uh, links in the overlay, and again, the Push message
is reverse routed along the Query hit path, okay, so it's reverse routed
along the reverse QueryHit path, and so when the peer receives
this, uh, Push message, it can then generate
an outgoing TCP connection. Here's what a Push
message looks like. Here's where the servent
ID field is used. This is, uh, taken from
the QueryHit message. The file index is also taken
from the QueryHit message so that you're not using
the entire file name. And then the IP address and
port number respond-correspond to the address
of the requesting peer so that the responding peer can create an outgoing
HTTP connection. When the responding peer
receives this Push message, it creates an, uh, uh, ah, uh, TCP connection that goes out
to the requesting peer. It sends a GIV HTTP
message along this. When the recei-when the
requestor receives this, it then sends a GET HTTP message
just like we discussed before, and then the file transfer
is completed just like we discussed before. If the requestor
is also behind a firewall, um, uh, then Gnutella gives up, uh, but you should be
able to think of, uh, a clear alternative,
uh, solution. Finally we come to the
Ping and Pong messages. These are used by peers, uh, to update, uh,
their neighbor lists. The Ping message, uh, is, uh,
flooded out, TTL restricted, and it is done so periodically
by every peer. Essentially, a Ping message
is sent by a peer to know its
immediate neighborhood. The TTL is typically-typically
the TTL is very small. It's typi- uh, typically
much smaller than 7 or 10, and this is used by the peer to know its one
or two Hop neighbors or three Hop neighbors maybe, so that it can
update its membership list. When a peer receives
a-a Ping message, it responds back
in the reverse route to the Ping message
using a Pong message. The Pong message contains
the IP address and port number of the responding peer, the number
of files it has shared, and the number of kilobytes
it has shared. These last two fields are used
by the, uh, pinging peer to prefer neighbors
which have more data and more files to share. Why is Ping and Pong needed? Well, because peer-to-peer
systems have a very high, um, rate of churn. Uh, clients are continuously
joining and leaving the system, and we'll discuss this
in a little bit, but the rate of churn
is so high that, the, uh, set of neighbors
that you have right now may not be there a few
seconds, uh, from now, because some of them
may have left the system. So it's very important for you
to keep your set of neighbors always, uh, fresh
and always, uh, fresh with the-with neighbors
that are are currently there in the, uh, uh, in the system so that you're not disconnected from the system. So in summary, Gnutella
maintains no servers. Instead, peers form
an, uh, overlay graph and they maintain neighbors. Peers store their own files,
queries are flooded out, TTL restricted,
forwarded only once, QueryHits are reverse routed along the reverse path. Gnutella also supports
file transfers when the responding peer
is behind a firewall, and it uses periodic Ping-pong to continuously refresh
neighbor lists so that, uh, peers maintain,
uh, connectivity to the overlay graph in spite
of churn in the system. Now because the size
of the list may be different, because different clients
may specify different maximal
neighbor list size, uh, they have found, um, uh, that there is heterogeneity
in the system, that different, uh, peers have
different numbers of neighbors. In fact, they've found that this
regular distribution, uh, the number of links
that a, uh, peer has follows a power
law distribution. In other words, the probability
that the number of neighbors you have is L ~ L/-k where k is a constant. This is a power
law distribution. Some of the problems with
original, uh, um, Gnutella have been solved since. Uh, the Ping and Pong traffic
in the original version of this Gnutella consumed a very
large amount of traffic, 50% of the traffic. One of the, uh, uh, fixes to
this was to multiplex. In other words, uh, when you
have multiple, uh, Pongs that are being received
from multiple peers, you, uh, make one Pong message out of it and, uh, send it forward instead of sending multiple
Pong messages. Similarly with the Pings, uh,
you forward, um, only one Ping when you receive multiple Pings. You can also cache
these messages. If you receive a Ping
from another, uh, peer and you have some
of the latest received Pongs for a previous Ping, you can simply send back, uh,
those cached pongs instead of forwarding
the Ping again. You can also reduce the
frequency of Pings and Pongs, uh, to bring down,
uh, this particular overhead. The same caching can
be used for keywords. Some files may be popular. A recently released song by some
artist may be more popular and may have, uh, may appear
in more Query messages. In that case you can cache
the QueryHit messages, and if you receive a query message with identical keywords to a previously cached
QueryHit message, then you can send back the previously cached
QueryHit messages instead of forwarding
the Query message themselves. Also, some peers just do
not have enough bandwidth. They might be connected over
very slow modems; um, they may not have enough
bandwidth for Gnutella traffic. In this case you may want
to use a central server to act as a proxy
for such, uh, peers. A different solution that leverages some
of the more powerful nodes in the systems, some of the more powerful appliance in a system, is called FastTrack,
which we'll discuss soon. Some of the other problems
with Gnutella, uh, which are not just problems
in Gnutella but problems with any
peer-to-peer system, uh, are the-is
problem of freeloaders. Uh, here, a-a freeloader
is essentially a user who only ever downloads files, never uploads files
to the peer-to-peer system. Studies, uh, have found that as
many as 70% of the users in the year 2000 in Gnutella
were freeloaders, um, and this meant that, um, only
a small fraction of the nodes, in this case 30%, uh, were taking on
most of the responsibilities of serving files, uh,
to the system. Again, this is a problem
that is not necessarily only Gnutella-specific. It's a problem that is-that
appears in all peer-to-peer, uh, systems because
of, uh, human behavior. This is not a technical issue, but rather
a human behavior issue. And I hope you have been
wondering all along, uh, why do you need to flood
the Query messages. Query messages being flooded
out are still fairly wasteful. A very large portion of the
entire overlay graph receives every single Query
message that is sent out. Uh, this can be very wasteful; this can use a lot of bandwidth. Instead, is there a way
of intelligently routing the Query messages so that it
reaches only those peers which are, um, currently storing, um, uh, copies of
the files that match, uh, the, um, what the querying
peer is looking for? That's essentially what a lot of the academic
peer-to-peer systems do. These are structured
peer-to-peer systems, and one of these systems,
called Chord, one of the first structured peer-to-peer systems that came out of academia, is one of the systems
that we'll study next.