So, in this lecture we will discuss some of the important properties of failure detectors. And we'll see some very simple failure detectors. Just to remind you again, we have a large group of processes and you have the same algorithm or protocols running at each of the processes in this system. We might consider the protocol running at only a given process PI, because the same thing is running at all processes. The communication is over an unreliable network. So once again, if a process PJ crashes, we need a failure detector to detect this failure, at least one process in the system. Perhaps, even multiple processes in the system. So the fact that PJ crashes is inevitable. All processes crash at some point of time. And as we have seen before, and this is a frequent occurrence in a large scale data center. This is the common case and the norm rather than the exception. And the frequency goes up linearly with the size of the data center. The frequency of failures. There are too important correctness properties for failure detectors, they are known as completeness and accuracy. Completeness essentially says that when a process fails, that process is detected eventually by at least one other non faulty process. There are two important terms there. The first is that it is detected by a non faulty process. Detection by a faulty process really doesn't make a difference. The second important term is eventually. This means that there is no time bound as of now at least, of when the process is detected as having failed. The second is kind of the converse but not really. It's known as accuracy which essentially says that, when a process is detected as having failed that process has in fact failed. In other words, it says that there are no mistaken failure detections or there are no false positives. But also, two other performance criteria, we'll discuss that in a little bit, but let's focus on just these two important criteria. The bad news is that achieving both of these properties, completeness and accuracy, over a network which loses packets, which can delay packets quite a bit, is impossible. In other words, over the Internet, all the wireless networks that we have today, or any realistic network, you cannot build a failure detector that is 100 percent complete, meaning, it detects all failures. And is 100 percent accurate, meaning, it never makes any mistakes. Essentially,this boils down to the fact that the failure detector problem is equivalent to another well-known problem in distributed computing known as consensus. In a consensus problem, which you'll see elsewhere in the course. Essentially, you'll have a group of processes that are trying to decide on the value of a single bit and that is a well-known proof that shows that this is impossible to do over lossy and delayed networks. So what happens in real life? In real life, failure detectors always guarantee completeness 100 percent of the time. And so they have to punt on the accuracy. Which means that the accuracy guarantee is either partial or it's a probabilistic guarantee. Always close to 100 percent, but never getting exactly at 100 percent. Why is this trade-off the right trade-off? Well you need completeness because when you have a failure, you definitely want to be able to detect it and recover from it. Make your data consistent again. You don't want to miss any failures. However, if you mistakenly did it go figure, it's fine for you to ask that poor victim process to leave the system and rejoin again perhaps with a different identifier. The overhead of doing that is less than if you did the reverse. All the failure detectors we'll study have this property of 100 percent completeness and less than 100 percent accuracy. There are two of the properties that are important for performance of failure detectors, speed is the first one. The speed basically says that between the time when a failure actually happens, and the first other non faulty process detects this failure, we want that time to first detection of failure to be as small as possible. You want your system to be responsive. A scale is important because you want your system to scale as a number of processes and your group grows. This means that you want to have a low and equally distributed load in terms of number of messages on each process or member in your group. Also, you want low overall network load in terms of the number of messages. Also, you want to avoid single points of failure, you want to avoid bottlenecks. And you want to get into all of these properties in spite of the fact that you might have arbitrary simultaneous process figures. So, it's not given to you that one process fails, your failure detector detects it, and then the next process fails. Multiple processes might fail simultaneously and your failure to vector must capture all of these failures. So let's see very simple failure detector protocol known as centralized heartbeating. The basic concept here is heartbeating. Consider the process PI, which needs to be detected as having failed. Essentially, what it does is that it sends periodic heartbeats to another process, PJ. A heartbeat is basically a message that carries a sequenced number. Every time PI sends a heartbeat to PJ, it increments this local sequence number and sends it over. Heartbeats are sent periodically, say once every pi seconds. PJ keeps track of when the last heartbeat from PI was received. If a new heartbeat has not been received within a specified time out, then it marks PI as having failed. The centralized hardbeating version of this protocol ensures that all of the other n-1 processes in the system sent heartbeats to one central process PJ. So, the nice thing about this is that if any of these other process and management fail, their heartbeat will stop arriving at PJ and PJ will time out and mark that process as having failed. So this protocol, for all the other n-1 processes, other than PJ, it is complete. However, when PJ fails, there is no guarantee about who detects that failure. Also the other disadvantage here is that if you have thousands of proxies in your group, PJ might be highly overloaded with messages. Obedient is the ring heartbeating where all the processes are organized in a virtual ring. And every process sends heartbeats to at least one of its neighbors. In this particular picture, each process sends heartbeats to it's left neighbor, as well as its right neighbor, or its anticlockwise as well as its clockwise neighbor. The quality of the heartbeats is the same. Again, it's a sequence number that is incremented locally and then sent over and the quality of the detection is again the same. If PJ times out are waiting for PIs heartbeats, then it marks PI as having failed. So this is better than a centralized approach because it avoids a hotspot but it's still not good enough because when you have multiple failures, you might have some failures that go undetected. Consider the situation where both of PIs anticlockwise and clockwise neighbors failed. And before the ring is repaired, then PI fails. At this point of time, PIs failure might go undetected because both its neighbors were down when PI failed. Of course, repairing the rings also and other overhead which you have to deal with over here, in the ring heartbeating approach. The third heartbeating approach is called, All-To-All heartbeating. Where each process PI, sends out heartbeats not to one or two other process in the system but to all the other processes in the system. And the processes do likewise they timeout waiting for heartbeats. And if their time are then they mark the corresponding processes having failed. So if PJ times out waiting for PI's heart beats, it marks PI as having failed. This is pretty good. First of all, it has an equal load per member. The load is high. And we'll get to the load later on why this might actually be not so bad. But we'll see that later on. First of all, the load is equal, it's well distributed across all. Second the protocol is complete. If PI fails, then as long as there is at least one other non-faulty process in the group, it will time-out waiting for PI's heartbeats. And it will detect PI as having failed. So it is complete for sure. So next lecture we'll see how to increase the robustness of all-to-all heartbeating. Essentially, the problem with all-to-all heartbeating is that if you have one process PJ that is slow and is receiving packets at longer delay than others, it might end up marking all the other or almost all the other processes as having failed, with higher probability. And so you might have a lower accuracy or a very high rate of false positives in all-to-all heartbeating. You can improve this by using more robust ways of sending out to the hardbeat, rather than just direct messages.