In this lecture
we will quickly review, uh, FastTrack and BitTorrent, uh, two systems
that are also very popular and have been very popular,
uh, for many years now. So FastTrack is, um, uh,
in a sense derived from Gnutella and is a hybrid between
Gnutella and Napster. Uh, it's a better version
Gnutella by, um, the fact that it uses some of the "healthier" participants, some of the more powerful peers in the system, uh, to make the system faster. FastTrack is
a proprietary system. It's the underlying technology in Kazaa, KazaaLite
and Grokster. Uh, though it's proprietary,
some of the details are known, and that's what we're
gonna discuss, uh, here. So FastTrack, for the most
part, is just like Gnutella. It maintains an overlay graph, but some of the peers, uh, have some special, uh, duties, and these peers
are known as supernodes. So this is what a FastTrack
system might look like. Uh, it looks just like a-a
Gnutella overlay, except that two of the peers, marked as "S" over here,
are supernodes. Uh, these peers might, uh, undertake some
of the responsibilities very similar to, uh,
Napster, uh, peers in the sense that they might be storing directory information that are used
by its neighboring peers in the overlay
to search for files. So a supernode stores
a directory listing of a subset of a nearby, um, uh, filename, uh,
peer pointer lists, uh, similar to what
Napster servers were doing. Uh, the supernode membership
might change over time. Essentially, a peer, uh, cannot
select itself to be a supernode. Instead, peers are selected
to be supernodes based on their contributions
in the past. Uh, essentially, uh, this
contribution is decided from a reputation level. For instance, in KazaaLite,
the participation level, the reputation, of a user
is between 0 and 1,000. When a user joins the system,
their reputation is 10. If the user has, uh, prolonged
periods of connectivity and more uploads
from that, uh, client, their reputation goes up, or the participation level goes up. When the participation level
crosses a threshold, uh, the peer might become
a supernode. Uh, there are also a lot of, uh, uh, sophisticated
reputation schemes that have been invented
in, um, the academic literature. Uh, there is an entire, uh,
workshop called P2PEcon, which, um, you might want to look at if you're interested, that covers some of,
uh, these ideas. With this, uh, the, uh, peers,
um, can now search much faster. They can just search
in nearby supernode, going back
to the previous figure. This peer on the bottom left
corner can now simply send a query, its query to, ah, its
neighboring supernode instead of flooding the query throughout the
entire overlay graph. Uh, why is there an advantage
to being a supernode? What is the incentive
to be a supernode? Well, a lot of your queries and
searches now become just local searches
in your local uh, data structure or your local
directory information, and so they do not incur
any network traffic. They are really, really fast. BitTorrent is
one of these systems that has been very popular
and continues to be popular. Uh, it has a lot of similarities with the systems
that we have discussed so far, but it works
in slightly different ways, uh, by incentivizing peers
to participate in the system. Remember that we discussed
that peers oftentimes do not contribute anything
to the system. They do not contribute files, they do not contribute even bandwidth in many cases, and BitTorrent addresses this
by having incentives, um, uh, for
the peers to participate so that the peers
can benefit from, uh, being unselfish
and helping other peers. So how does, uh,
BitTorrent work? Well, BitTorrent has
a notion of trackers. Uh, typically there is
one tracker per file. Uh, there might also be
trackers for multiple files. When a peer wants
to join the system, you f-somehow find, uh,
the torrent or the tracker, uh, and this, uh, enables you
to talk to the tracker. The tracker, uh, maintains
a list of some of the peers that are currently
transferring that file. Uh, it does so
by receiving heartbeats from, uh, the current, uh, peers heartbeat messages,
uh, from these peers. The peers are of two kinds,
a seed, which has a full file and is still continuing to be,
um, uh, part of the system and help the other peers download the file, and the leechers, which has some blocks from the file, a file is split up into blocks, [silence] typically equal sized blocks, and, uh, this
peer has some of the files and is still looking to download the other, uh, blocks
of that particular file. The new peer, when it joins this
particular, uh, group of peers, uh, is also a leecher
because it has, obviously, none of the blocks
of that particular file. A file is typically
split into blocks. Uh, the block size is fixed, maybe somewhere between 32 kilobytes to 256 kilobytes. Uh, now when a peer
starts to download a file from some of its neighbors, remember, going back
to the previous slide, the peer, when it joins, uh, when it joins the group, it has some neighboring peers, and it has multiple blocks
that it can download and multiple peers
from which it can download, uh, each of these blocks. How does it select
which block to download and which peer to download from? Well, it uses the Local
Rarest First policy. Essentially, um,
it prefers that block which is the least replicated among its current neighbors. Uh, this is useful because- because with churn
in the system, some of these blocks
might disappear quicker than other blocks, uh, and earlier than other blocks that are replicated more
among its neighbors. And so, uh, this Local Rarest
First policy helps to download those blocks
that are the rarest. There are of course
exceptions to this. Uh, a new node, newly joining
peer, is allowed to pick one, uh, neighbor at random,
and this helps in bootstrapping so that you don't
always get stuck, uh, with just one
deterministic group. Now incentives are provided by a tit-for-tat bandwidth
usage scheme. Um, uh, this incentivizes a peer
to provide blocks to neighbors, uh, so that, um, you-you're
providing blocks to neighbors that provided you the best download
rates in the past, okay? So this, uh, enables or
incentivizes your neighbors to provide download, uh,
speed to you so that you are then
able to provide, uh, blocks to it in the future. And the seeds do the same too,
not just the leechers. Now, the number of, uh,
concurrent transfers that might go on for-from a peer to its neighboring peers might become very large, um, so you don't want this to
overload the, uh, peer itself, and so choking is used here. Choking limits
the number of neighbors to which concurrent uploads
are going on. Um, uh, typically this is
a n-small number like 5. Uh, these are
the best neighbors. Everyone else is
considered to be choked. These selected neighbors are
considered to be unchoked. Uh, you periodically reevaluate
this set, say every 10 seconds, and you do
an optimistic unchoke, so periodically you
unchoke a random neighbor. This helps keep the, uh, set of
neighbors that are unchoked, uh, to be very, very fresh. Okay, and again, this is used,
uh, because the set of blocks that are-that are peers
is changing, and also the set of peers
in your group is changing because of, uh, churn. Okay, so choking, in summary,
helps peers to, um, uh, limit how many other peers they're, uh, uploading to, uh, so that the upload bandwidth is, uh, not overwhelmed.