[MUSIC] Finally, we get to see the solution or
in courts the solution to the consensus problem in
the Asynchronous Distributed System Model. One of the most popular solutions that
is used in industry, and that has also been proven to be theatrically
sound is what is known as Paxos. And we'll see a sort of, simplified
version of Paxos in this lecture. So as you have all ready seen consensus is
impossible to solve in the asynchronous distributed system model. And this is been proved by Fischer,
Lynch and Patterson also known as
the FLP Proof in the 1980s. And the key to the proof is that it is
impossible to distinguish a failed process from one that is very, very, very slow. And because you cannot distinguish these
two scenarios the rest of the group, even though they may be very healthy. And they may not have too many delays,
they can't really decide whether you know, that one process sent any messages,
whether it's already made a decision, and so everyone should decide the same thing. And so
they might always be ambivalent about which decision to make either zeroes
decision, or all ones decision. But consensus as we've seen, is very important because it maps to
many of the most important problems that are there in distributed computing,
and in cloud computing. So of course, the question rises, can
we just, can't we just solve consensus? And in fact, Paxos does solve consensus, in a sense it's the most popular
consensus solving algorithm. It doesn't really solve
consensus because you cannot there is impossibility of proof,
obviously. We've already shown that. It provides what is known as safety,
and eventual liveness, if it provided just liveness, time-bounded liveness,
then that would have solved consensus but since the possibility result is there
it can only provide eventual liveness. A lot of systems use Paxos, or a variants of it Apache Zookeeper which
was originally built by Yahoo, uses it. Google Chubby which is very deep
in the Google stack uses it, and many other companies use it as well. Just give you a moment here to guess,
who invented Paxos it is our friend Leslie Lamport,
who also invented the Lamport timestamps. So Paxos provides the two properties
of safety and eventual liveness. Safety essentially,
says that consensus is not violated. This means that two processes,
non-faulty processes, do not end up deciding on different
values where one process decides a zero, the other process decides a one, okay. That's if that happened,
that would be violation of safety. Once again, just to remind you,
safety is the guarantee that nothing bad ever happens and
the bad thing here would be two, two different processes that are
non-faulty deciding on different values. Liveness is the guarantee that something
good eventually, happens in this case, something good is that processes
actually reach a decision. If things go well in the future, for
instance, messages and failures are just the right way, then there's a good chance
that consensus will be reached, and everyone will decide the same,
will decide a value and because of safety this value
will end up being the same. But there is no guarantee that liveness
will actually be achieved within a time-bound, or even within our lifetime. The guarantee is only eventual. However, implementations of Paxos
often reach consensus fairly quickly. 'Kay, so Paxos is not guaranteed to reach
consensus ever, or within a time-bound. So FLP, the FLP impossibility
result still applies, but in practice,
a consensus is reached fairly quickly. So here's how Paxos works, and again
this is a simplified version of Paxos. There are a lot of optimizations in Paxos
which we won't be discussing here, and those optimizations are in fact,
important for its correctness. Paxos works in rounds just like
the synchronous consensus protocol we saw earlier, and you might wonder here, how do we set rounds if the process clocks
are not synchronized with each other, as is the case in asynchronous
distributed systems. Rounds are in fact, asynchronous here,
time synchronization is not required. If you are, if you are a process that is
in round j, and you hear a message that is tagged with round j plus 1, you abort
everything that you are doing in round j, and simply move over to round j plus 1. 'Kay, so this is completely asynchronous. You also use timeouts, if timeouts happen
you just move over to the next round, and of course, timeouts may be pessimistic and
this is okay, because we only are trying to give eventual
liveness not time-bounded liveness. Each round has a unique ballot ID which
distinguishes the round and you'll see this ballot ID playing out, as we see
the Paxos protocol in the next few slides. Each round is broken into three phases,
and again, these phases might be
asynchronous by themselves. The first phase is called the Election
phase where a leader is elected, the second phase is called a Bill phase
where this leader proposes a value, and the other processes in the group ack,
or acknowledge this value. And finally, the third phase which is
called the Law phase, where the leader multicasts this final value to the other
processes, and they accept this value. 'Kay, so we'll see these three phases
play out over the next few slides. So the first phase is the Election phase. Eventually, the leader
chooses unique ballot ID and this ballot ID is chosen to be
higher than anything seen so far. Now there might be multiple
potential leaders in, who are trying to become
the actual leader in the group. So the potential leader needs to get votes
from the other processes in the group. So this potential leader sends out
the unique ballot ID to the other processes in the group. Processes wait to receive ballot IDs
from multiple potential leaders, and they respond once each
process works exactly, once to the highest ballot
ID it has seen so far. If the potential leader sees
a higher ballot ID highest, higher ballot ID it
refuses to be the leader. Nicely so essentially,
when process has received, and a potential leader has
received a majority, or a quorum of okay messages, it is then
permitted to be the leader in the group. 'Kay, this means that because each process
works at most once, you cannot have two leaders in the group, essentially, because
then it would mean that two quorums intersect and some process has watered
multiple times, and that's not allowed. Okay?
However, it's possible that no
one reaches a majority because processes voted too early, and they voted for the wrong potential
leaders, and no one reaches a majority. And if this is the case, you just start the next round again,
where, you start again with the Election. However, there are some corner cases
where multiple leaders may be elected, in this case, and Paxos works even there
correctly, but we'll just discuss the case where there is only one leader elected
at the beginning of the Election phase. Now processes also log the received ballot
ID on disk, and this is important because if processes crash, and then recover, then
they can look at the log and, and, and then start where they left off, 'kay. So, again, if things go right
a round cannot have two leaders just because two quorums intersect, and
a process cannot work more than once. So that's the Election phase where the
potential leader sends out a please elect me message, and everyone responds with
an OK, and then the leader waits for a majority, or a quorum and if so,
then it becomes the leader. If it doesn't get a majority or
quorum, it then starts the next round. In the Bill phase the leader
sends a proposed value v to all. The only constraint here is that the
leader if it already knows of a value that has been decided in
a previous Paxos round, it needs to reuse that same value v prime,
'kay. If no value has been decided in a previous
round then it can use whatever value including, for instance,
its own proposed value. Recipients, when they receive this
proposed value, they log it on disks, so that they can recover from failures, and
then they respond back with an OK message. That's the Bill phase. Finally, you have a Law phase, where the leader waits to hear
a majority of OKs from the bill phase. When it hears a majority of OKs, when it reaches a quorum, it lets
everyone know of the new decided value v. And when recipients receive a decision,
they log it on disk, and then they send their decision variables. So that's the Paxos protocol in
a nutshell fairly simplified here. 'kay. Now the question here is
what is the point in order. When has consensus already
been reached in the system? You might think that consensus
has been reached when the Law phase is done at the end of the
final value being multicast but in fact, consensus is reached slightly earlier even
though the processes don't know it yet. In fact, consensus is reached
in the middle of the Bill phase, when the majority of processes have
heared, have heard of the propo, proposed value and have logged it. They may not have responded
to it with an OK but because they have logged it,
they would start where they left off, and that would eventually,
lead to a majority of OKs. The processes may not know it yet, but
a decision has been made for the group. And even a leader may not know it yet, and that's the point of no return after which
that value will be decided in the future, and no other value will
be decided in the future. If the leader fails after that,
you simply restart the round, and processes will then respond back with
the old decided value v in this case, which the leader is then forced
to use in the Bill phase. Because that's what we discussed
earlier the leader has to do. So, why does this
algorithm guarantee safety? In other words, why does it ensure that
two different values are not decided by two different processes? Well, if some round has a majority,
that is a quorum, hearing proposed value v prime and accepting it in the middle of
Phase 2, then subsequently at each round either the round chooses v prime as
its decision, or the round fails. In other words, either it obeys safety,
or it just starts another round. Okay?
So it doesn't decide any other value other than v prime. Well, the reason for this seeing through
is that potential leader waits for a majority OKs in Phase 1, and
because this is a majority or quorum, and a quorum has already heard
a proposed value v prime. That quorum that the leader waits for, and the quorum that has accepted v prime
will intersect in at least one process. And that process will send the value
of v prime to the potential leader, and the potential leader will be forced to use
that value v prime for the Bill phase. And so if the round ever makes a decision,
it will be the value of v prime. The round might, however, fail and in that
case the round will just restart again, a new round will start, and in that case,
again, the value v prime will be used in the Bill phase for the same
reasons as we have just talked about. So the key here again, is that success
requires a majority or a quorum, and any two majority sets or
quorums intersect in this particular case. So that safety what about liveness? Well, again,
there's only eventual liveness. Eventually, if things go right,
if there are not too many failures, and if messages are not delayed just the
wrong time then there's a good chance that the Paxos protocol, some round of
the Paxos might actually, end up with a decision being a maid, and the Law
phase succeeding at all the processes. A lot of things could go wrong that could
prevent rounds from succeeding, and these need actions to be taken
by the Paxos protocol so that it's still trying to reach liveness. For instance processes might fail,
and a majority may not included. When the process restarts,
it just uses its log which is on disk and so it's durable. To retrieve a past decision,
and passing ballot IDs, and then it tries to know of the past
decisions and continue with the protocol. The leader might fail, if this is so, then
the other processes timeout waiting for a bill from it, or
a law message from it, and then one of them will just
start the next round. Messages might get dropped the value
proposals of the OK messages might get dropped quorums might not be reached or
processes might timeout. If things are too flaky, then timeouts
will make sure that another round starts, and then all the proceeds will just
automatically move over to the next round. A round can start at any point of time. So, the current round, maybe about any point of time any process
might a timeout waiting for a reply. Are a Bill or a Law message and
start the next round. And this means that the protocol
may actually never end, and this is a direct outcome
of the impossibility result. You cannot guarantee time-bound liveness
you can only guarantee eventual liveness. If things go well, in the future
then consensus will be reached. So a lot of more things could go wrong. What we've seen is a highly simplified
view of the Paxos protocol. Leslie Lamport's original paper
outlined the Paxos protocol in terms of a parliament, and
even though the paper is hard to read, I encourage you to take a look at it. There are a couple of variants of this
paper that are out there that have tried to present a simplified
version of this Paxos algorithm. Do you might want to take
a look at those as well. So in summary consensus is a very
important problem because it's equivalent to many distributed computing problems
that have to do with reliability. Examples being failure detection,
leader election and also agreement. Consensus is possible to solve in
the synchronous system model, where message delays, and processing delays
as well as clock drifts are bounded. But it is impossible to solve
when these are unbounded. In other words, in the inc, in
the asynchronous distributed system model. And again, the key here is that slow
processes are hard to be distinguished from processes that have just failed. The Paxos protocol is a widely
used implementation of a consensus solution that is safe, but only eventually
alive, and it's used in Apache Zookeeper, Google's Chubby system, Active Disk Paxos,
and many other cloud computing systems. So that would end
the consensus lecture series I have an optional lecture
series coming up after this. Which for those of you who are brave that
lecture will show you the FLP Proof. The Impossibility of Consensus in
the asynchronous split system. It's kind of an interesting proof because
it several interesting concepts in it, and it will give you a feel for why? No matter what protocol you propose
to solve consensus the asynchronous system model always has a way of keeping
the system away from making a decision. [MUSIC]