[MUSIC] In this lecture we will see how
internals of MapReduce work and we'll look at the workings
of the scheduler as well which is a new Hadoop scheduler. So, how do you program MapReduce? For the user, as far as user is concerned,
the user writes the map program, particularly a short map function or
method and also writes a reduce program
short reduce function or method. Then they start up their job. They specify the number of map tasks and
reduce tasks and they submit the job and they wait for the result. Essentially the user's job is very easy
because the user does not need to know much about Hadoop or
distributive programming beyond the number of map tasks or
reduce tasks that they need. Internally, and this is where things
become interesting for us students, for the paradigm, MapReduce paradigm and
the scheduler itself, it has to worry about parallelizing
the map, it has to worry about essentially in the stage, splitting up or sharing of
the data among the different map tasks. It has to transfer the data from
the map to the reduce in a sense it has to work through
the partitioning function here and make sure that the correct data is being
sent to the correct reduce function. There has to paralyze the reduce. In other words, there has to schedule
the reduce tasks themselves. And finally, a sort of on top of these three it has to
implement storage for the Map input, for the Map output, which is the same as the
Reduce input, and also the Reduce output. Also, one of the things we have seen so
far is the way that Map phase works and the way the Reduce phase works after it. Essentially, none of the Reduce tasks can
start before all the Map tasks are done. Why is this? Well this is because if there is
at least one map task running, it's possible that it generates
some key value pairs, while that key has already been processed
by the corresponding reduce, so you essentially you don't want
to start any of the reduces. Now this statement has been fudged,
it's not literally true, because in many of the cases you can
maintain, you can have some of the reduced tasks start earlier, this has actually
been implemented in MapReduce as well. But as far as understanding is concerned,
let's just go with the fact that none of the reduced tasks can start
before all the map tasks are done. This is called a bad year, because it's
essentially you have a bad year between the map phase and the reduced phase, the map phase needs to be completely done
before any of the reduce tasks can start. One of the ways in which this barriers not
really true is that the traffic that goes from the MapReduce, the map output and the
reduce input, which is called the shuffle traffic, can be started parallelly while
the map tasks are still continuing. Okay. So, once the shuffle phase, the shuffle phase can be
parallelized would the map phase and once a shuffle phase is done, then it can,
then the reduced task can start. So how do you solve these problems? Well, in the Cloud essentially
paralellizing the map is easy because remember each map task was independent
of the other map task, and so these map tasks can be assigned
essentially to any server. And you typically want to assign
the map tasks to servers where the data is close by so
that you incur low network overhead. But we'll talk about that later on. Then you also want to make
sure that all the map output records with the same key
are assigned to the same reduce. And that helps you to transfer
the data from the map to the reduce. In this case you use
a partitioning function, for instance as we've discussed earlier
the hash partitioning function may be used where each key is assigned to the earliest
task number which is obtained by hashing the key more than load
the number of reducers. The reducers go from zero to
the number of reducers minus one in id Finalizing the reduce is also easy
because each reduce task is essentially independent of the other. Each reduce task is assigned a set of
keys and these keys are disjoined across reducers, so
reducers do not overlap with each other. And in terms of number of keys,
on the input or the output, and so they can be run
independently of each other. And notice here that it makes it
easy to schedule these map tasks and these reduce tasks because there is no
communication between two map tasks, there's no communication in
between two of these tasks either, they are fully parallelized
with respect to each other. Finally, you need to implement storage. The map input in the beginning and there
is output right at the end of the reduced phase are both sorted in this
distributed file system. This distribute file system is running
typically on the same servers where the map tasks and
the reduce tasks are run. For instance, the Google version of Map
Reduce Runs uses the Google File System, also known as GFS, and Hadoop, the
Apache Hadoop open source implementation uses HDFS, known as
the Hadoop Distributed File System. Typically these five systems will
store multiple replicas of the same input data block. It replicates file blocks a multiple
times typically three times and there are three copies of each file block
located on three different servers. And so when a map task starts up
it needs to fetch the data block that is its input data block from one of
the servers that is storing it currently. It queries the online HDFS file system
to do this and this transfer is faster, obviously, if the server on which
that particular block is located, is in fact the same server on
which the map task is running. So, then we also have to discuss
where the map output is stored. Well the map output is not
stored in the distributed files. And instead the map output is stored to
the local disk at the server on which the map task is running. And the reduce input is read
from these remote disks. Okay, so it is read from
the multiple remote disks, one for each of the map tasks services. The reason why this intermediate
shuffle traffic between the map and the reduce uses the local file
system is you want it to be fast. This intermediate data
is really not needed. It's not really visible to
the external user it's only needed for the reduce phase to start its work. And so essentially you don't want
to incur the high overhead of the underlying distributed file
system which might be replicated which might try to put it
on some other servers. You don't want to incur this high
overhead, you want it to get as fast as possible to the reduce tasks so
that the job can finish quickly. Finally, when the reduce output is done, it is written to the distribute
file system back, so the output of the entire map reduce job is
available in the distributed file system. So let's look at a pictorial depiction of
what goes on in a MapReduce application. So you have the input data set
we just split up into blocks. In this case, I have 7 blocks. Which are stored in
the distributive file system. Again each of these blocks might
be stored at a different server, and each of these blocks might be
replicated at multiple servers. Then you have the map tasks, and in this
case each map task is assigned one block, so I have seven map tasks over here. The resource manager,
which runs a scheduler of MapReduce, and again, here I'm using Hadoop
terminology, is responsible for assigning these maps tasks to servers and
it's also responsible for assigning the reduce tasks,
which appear later on, to servers as well. So it might assign, for instance,
the first two map tasks to server A, the next three map tasks to server B,
and the last two map tasks to server C. And so these map tasks run on
the corresponding servers and they would fetch the corresponding
input and process them. Next the outputs of these map tasks are
sent to the corresponding reduced tasks. I have three reduced tasks
in this particular case. And each of the reduced tasks
might receive output from each of the mapped tasks. because here the map tasks might
have key value pairs with keys for each of the three reduced tasks. Again, as I mentioned
in the previous slide, this shuffle traffic over here is written
locally at these servers and fetched remotely from the corresponding reduce
tasks wherever they may be scheduled. So that scheduling, again, is done by the Resource Manager which
assigns each reduce task to one server. For instance Server A might have some
map tasks that are running on it, that are generating data,
output shuffle data, for the reduce task
that is assigned to it. That data doesn't go anywhere. It does not go on the network. It stays local to A. However, this third map task
might have some output, which needs to be sent to
this first reduce task. And that reduce task will need to go over
the network and be sent to server A. Finally when each of these
reduce tasks is done, their output is written into
the distributor file system. Typically these are written as separate
files into the distributor file system, and they might be named or numbered
based on the reduce task number so that they can be thereafter collated into
either one file or into a directory. So that's how the MapReduce
workflow works. Let's look a little bit into how
the scheduling itself works. I've mentioned one of the terms here,
resource manager, and this is one of the terms that
appears in the YARN scheduler. The YARN scheduler is a new
scheduler that is being used in the Apache Hadoop version two onwards. YARN stands for Yet
Another Resource Negotiator. The main entities of resources that
YARN leaves with anonymous containers. Container is essentially
some CPU plus some memory. So, each server consist of
a collection of containers. So for instance,
if a server has 4 cores and 4 gigabytes of RAM, in each container is
one core and 1 gigabyte of RAM, then that server has 4 containers and essentially it
can run four tasks one on each container. YARN has three main components. The resource manager, node managers,
and application masters. There is one global resource manager
which essentially runs the scheduler. There is one node manager
per server in the system. This is a Daemon that is responsible for
all the server specific management on that particular
server and also responsible for monitoring the failures of tasks that are running
on that particular machine themselves. Then there is the Per-application or Per
job Application Master which also runs in one of the servers and
this is responsible for negotiating containers with the
Resource Manager and the Node Managers. It's also responsible for communicating
with the Node Managers to find out if any of them has died, and so if the tasks
that are running off, the tasks of the job that are running on that particular
server need to be rescheduled as well. So, materially here's what happens, in this figure I have two servers
shown as Node A and Node B. Each of these servers is
running a Node Manager. There are two jobs,
shown as Job 1 and Job 2. Each of these has one application master,
Application Master 1, Application Master 2. A task belonging to the Application
2 has just finished here. I also have a resource
manager that is running. The capacity scheduler which is one
of the popular schedulers in Hadoop. So here what happens in this
timeline is that, the Application 1, rather it's Application Master 1
says to the resource manager, hey, I need a container, I need to run a test. Resource manager doesn't have empty
containers so it queues this up and subsequently the Node Manager B might say,
hey, one container here's completed
when this task is done. And at this point, the resource manager
can tell the Application Master 1, there's a container on node B
that you can run your task on and Application Master 1 that communicates
with node manager B to start that task. So this is typically the flow
of things that might happen in order to assign a new container. Now, this is somewhat, slightly part from
the truth, in truth when a job starts up it immediately tells the resource
manager all of its requirements so there might be multiple containers that
are outstanding, container requests that are outstanding in the resource manager,
also there might be multiple jobs or multiple applications that are requesting
containers at the same time. All those requests will be
outstanding in the resource manager. It will be queued typically
based on the order, some order of the jobs, by default
order is first in and first out for the jobs that have arrived in order
of arrival at the resource manager. Jobs that have arrived earlier
may be given resources earlier. [MUSIC]