[MUSIC] Hi there. In this series of lectures, we are going to look at the classical
problem called leader election, which has been useful in many variants of systems,
including today's cloud computing systems. In this lecture today we'll see what
leader election problem actually is. So let's start with an example. Suppose your bank account details
are replicated at a few servers that are maintained by your bank. But one of the servers that the bank
maintains is responsible for receiving all the reads and writes from a client, such
as ATMs or the banking application on your iPad or the banking application on the,
on the website, or so on and so forth. So this single special server
that is on the bank side is called the leader server
among the replicas. Okay, so the leader is responsible
essentially for coordinating the replicas. Now, there are several scenarios
that can happen with a leader. There might be two leaders per customer. This might be problematic because now
the group of replica servers is not sure who the leader is. And therefore reads and writes might
be split across these multiple leaders. Servers might also disagree
about who the leader is. Some servers might know leader,
server a as a leader and other servers might consider
a different server as a leader. And that server might not
even think it's the leader. And this might, again,
lead to inconsistency in the system. If the leader crashes and this means
that the clients may not be able to send reads and writes to the system. And once again, you may need to
re-elect a new leader in the system. So each of these scenarios that
I've described as a question, leads to either inconsistency or
unavailability in the system. Some more examples of situations
which require a leader. We discussed the Different
types of multicast ordering. And one of the ways of implementing
total ordering from multicasts was to use a sequencer process. And this was a special elected
process from among the group of processes itself and there needed to be
exactly one sequence of process, okay. This sequence is essentially the leader. If you have multiple sequencers, then a total ordering may in
fact be violated in the group. When we discuss time synchronization,
we discuss the network time protocol, also known as NTP, and the NTP
organizes all the servers into a tree. And there is one server at
the root of the tree and you need to elect who the server is from
among all the potential NTP root servers. Other systems in industry that also
leverage leader election include open source systems such as Apache Zookeeper
and also Google's Chubby system, on top of which a lot of Google's systems,
internal systems, rely on. Essentially in a nutshell,
a leader in a process group is useful for coordination among the processes
in the group itself. Typically these processes
are servers in a cloud. [NOISE] So, in a nutshell, in a group of
processes, we want to elect a leader. One of the processes needs to be elected
a leader to undertake special tasks such as coordination. Also, it's not just efficient to elect
a leader and let the leader know about it. You need to let all the non-leaders in
the group also know who the leader is. These are the two requirements
of the leader election protocol. What happens when this leader crashes or
fails? Well, first of all some
process detects this failure. How does it detect it? Well, it detects this using
say a failure detector. Using any one of the failure detectors
we have seen elsewhere in this course. You could also use other mechanisms as
you will see some of our systems do. But what happens after
you detect this failure? Well, after this failure you
is detected then you need to run another election algorithm so
that a new leader is elected. And this leader is a non-faulty process,
meaning one that has not crashed. And also you need to let all
the other non-faulty processes in the group know who the new leader is. So that's the goal of
the election algorithm. That's the leader election
problem in disabled systems. So once again, when someone gives you
a problem just make sure that you know what the system model is, under which
you are trying to solve the problem. Essentially the system model tells
you what the assumptions are. In this case our system model
consists of N processes. Each process has a unique id. For instance,
its IP address and port number. Messages that are sent from one process
to another are delivered eventually. They may take awhile but
they are delivered eventually and they're delivered reliably. Failures may also occur
during the election protocol. So for instance,
while you're trying to elect a leader, the leader might itself fail. The next would be leader might in fa,
might in fact fail. Or one of the other processes
in the system might fail, and the leader election protocol needs
to be tolerant to such failures. So, a few more requirements from
the view point of the election itself. Any process should be able to call for
an election. Why is this? Well first of all, any process in the system may
detect the failure of the leader. For instance, why the failure
detector most failure directors allow any process in the system
to detect the failure. For instance, heartbeat based failure detectors are [INAUDIBLE]
failure detectors. When a process detects that the leader
has failed, it an initiate an election, which essentially means it calls for
an election. A process can call for
at most one election at a time. We don't want multiple elections
running simultaneously. If multiple processes call
an election simultaneously, we want all of those together
to yield exactly one leader. We don't them to yield
conflicting leaders. But at a time,
you want only one election running. Also, the results of an election
must not depend on who caused it. So the initiator's ID whichever
processes initiated the election, that must not influence the outcome
of the election itself. Instead, outcome of the election must be
based on cert, certain other criteria that are important to this system or
are important to the application. So a little bit more formally,
a run of the election algorithm must always guarantee two
properties at the end. The properties are safety and liveness. Safety, once again just to remind you, is the property that
nothing bad ever happens. And in this case of the election, safety
says that for all non-faulty processes p. P's elected variable which stands for
p's vision of who the current leader is. Should either be q, a particular non-faulty process
with the best attribute value. I'll talk about attributes
in a little bit, but essentially assume that each
process in the group has an attribute. Say the IP address is the attribute. Right?
We want to elect that process as the leader that has the best attribute
value, say the highest IP address. So, safety says that p's
elected variable must point to the that non-faulty process in the group
that has the best attribute value. Or a p selected variable points to Null. In other words, p never makes a mistake
and points its elected variable to a, a leader, a process that must not be
leader according to the best attribute. Liveness property again,
informally speaking, liveness says that something
good eventually happens. And in this particular case
the liveliness property says that for all runs of the election,
the election run terminates, meaning that something you know,
all the processes quiet to the end. And then for all non-faulty processes p at
the end, p's elected is set to not Null. Okay?
So, p's elected is not Null at the end if p is a non-faulty process. So the combined safety and
liveliness essentially says that, at the end of the leader election run,
which terminates, the that process where the best
attribute value is elected as a leader. And all the other non-faulty
processes in the system have their local elected variables pointing
to this newly elected leader. So what do I mean by electing
the process with the best or highest election attribute value? Well one of the most common
attributes used is the highest id. So among all the ids in the group, you elect that process as
the leader that has the highest id. You can also reverse this and elect the
process with the lowest id in the group. That's fine too. Other attribute examples
include IP address. They include fastest CPU. Or you could use the disk space. Or you could use in peer-to-peer
like settings, you could use processes that have the most number of
files or the least number of files. As long as this attribute is fixed in
the beginning and all the processes know about it, you're going to get a consistent
leader election specification and protocol as well. So in the next lecture, we're going to see
a classical leader election algorithm. And then we'll follow that up by seeing
a few more leader election algorithms. [MUSIC]