So today we
are bringing together the dissemination component, and the failure detection
component as well, and we will also discuss
a technique known as suspicion that can improve your, uh, false positive, uh, rate. So, again, to remind you, uh, we
have, um, uh, uh, we have, uh, the dissemination, uh, component
here that is, uh, tasked with the goal
of disseminating out information about
a detected failure. Also this, uh, component can
be used to send out information about, uh, processes that have
joined the group and as, as well as processes that are going
to be leaving the group. There is different
mechanisms you can use. You could use, uh, um, hardware
multicast or IP multicast. Uh, the issue with this is, uh,
that it might be unreliable, it is not guaranteed
to get, uh, the information across to all the recipients. Also IP multicast is not
necessarily enabled in all the routers and, uh,
switches in the network. Also this might result in multiple
simultaneous multicasts, especially if you have, um,
multiple, uh, processes that are detecting the same
failure almost at the same time. Instead you could use, uh,
point-to-point messaging, uh, where the detecting, uh, process
sends out, um, uh, either TCP or UDP, uh, messages to all of the processes
in the system. This can get very expensive, especially when you're talking of thousands of processes in the group. A third option, which is
available to us, especially if you're using
the SWIM style of, uh, uh, failure detection, uh, which we saw
in the last lecture, is, uh, by piggybacking
this information on top of the failure
detection messages. This is known as
infection-style dissemination; this is where the "I"
in SWIM comes from. So you might recall this particular SWIM failure
detector protocol. Essentially what we do is that, uh, we piggyback information about some of the recently
detected failures on top of the ping messages, on top of the ack messages, on top
of the indirect ping messages, and on top
of the indirect ack messages. Whenever processes receive
these messages, they do the same
as they did before, but in addition they also look
at what is being piggybacked and use that to update
their membership lists. So this is known as epidemic
style dissemination because the ping and ack
messages are random messages going around the system, and so essentially
you're using epidemic or gossip style dissemination to disseminate out
the information about the detected
failures as well. So the same properties
that we saw in the gossip style failure detection for detecting failures now holds for disseminating information about the failures. Specifically, after lambda times
log-in protocol periods, where lambda is some constant, uh, N power minus...two lambda
minus two processes would not have heard
about the update, which means that most, uh,
processes in the system hear about the update after all the log-in protocol periods. Essentially, eh, every process
maintains a buffer of recently joined
and evicted processes, or join and, uh,
left or failed processes. You piggyback, uh, uh,
some entries from this buffer on top of every message, ping,
ack, indirect ping, or indirect ack
that you send out, and, uh, if you want to maintain
a constant size buffer, you, uh, prefer recent updates and you garbage college-collect
element that are old. If you really care about, uh,
um, more consistency you can, uh, buffer, uh,
elements, um, uh, for longer and garbage collect them after lambda times
log-in protocol periods. Uh, this ensures that, uh,
with high probability, the information
has already been received at all the, uh, members
or processes in your group. But of course there's always
a small probability that-that it
has not been received. So what the value
of lambda is here, it determines, uh, the level
of consistency that you get. No matter what you choose here, you can always be sure that you have completeness guaranteed because, uh, because
of the SWIM failure detector that ensures that all, uh,
failures are detected in, uh, two N minus one protocol
periods, in the worst case. Now in spite of all of this, your false positive rate
might be too high. Uh, this might be too high, uh, because there are
false detections, uh, that are occurring due
to processes that are perturbed, processes that are facing
quite a bit of jumpiness in their, um, um, uh,
message loss rate. Uh, also, there might be
packet losses that occur due
to, uh, congestion. Indirect pinging may not really
solve the problem because there might just be
a high message loss rate near the, um, uh, faulty-the detected faulty host, the pinged host,
during that period of time. The target here is to give
the process a second chance by suspecting it before declaring it as, uh, failed in the group. In other words,
you use a state machine where Pi maintains
a state machine for a given other process, Pj, which is present
in its membership list. By default this, uh,
state is in, a-alive. Uh, if the failure detector detects the process
as having failed, uh, Pj as having failed, then, uh, you move the process
Pj state to suspected. In addition, you start
disseminating via the SWIM piggyback messages the fact that you're
suspecting process Pj. This, uh, state is, uh,
sustained for a while, which times out after a while,
and after the time out, the process Pj
is marked as having failed, and at that point of time
you start disseminating failed Pj via
your SWIM piggyback messages. When you're in the suspected
state for process Pj, you might receive, uh,
an ack for process Pj or maybe even another direct ping from process Pj, or even a message
from someone else in the group saying, "Hey, process Pj
has not failed, but in fact it is alive." In that case you move
the state back again to alive for process Pj. One of the issues here is that, uh, process Pj might
go back and forth between the alive and the
suspected state multiple times. In order to avoid confusion,
you use incarnation numbers. There is a per-process
incarnation number, uh, this is incremented, uh, the pr-the incarnation number
for a process Pi can only be incremented by Pi. Typically Pi does this when it
receives a suspect Pi message, meaning that someone else
in the group is suspecting process Pi
as having failed. It might receive this via a ping
or an ack, uh, message, or an indirect ping
or an indirect ack message, or it might even be piggyback. Uh, and-but it receives this
and increments this Pi message, its, uh, increment,
its-its incarnation number, and starts disseminating
an alive Pi message, along with
the incarnation number. This is, uh, this mechanism
is similar to some routing protocols that are used in ad hoc networks especially the DSDV
routing protocol. Essentially higher incarnation
number notifications override the notifications
of lower incarnation numbers. So for instance, uh, um, uh,
as we've discussed before, uh, the suspect incarnation,
uh, message when it is received
at a process, um, um, Pk for process Pj, uh,
is, uh, used to override, uh, the, uh, alive, uh, information
for process Pj or Pk. So in other words, if process
Pk knows that Pj is alive in incarnation number 35, it receives a suspect Pj incarnation number 35 message, it will mark Pj
as, uh, suspected, over to the suspected state, and start gossiping, uh, or piggybacking the suspect
Pj incarnation 35 messages. Uh, if an alive message
is received with a higher
incarnation number, 36, then the process Pj is moved
back into the alive state again because this is a more recent,
um, uh, notification. However the failed,
uh, um, incarnation, uh, uh, fail-failed message
for any process Pj, regardless
of incarnation number, overrides everything else. So once a process Pj is marked
as having failed, once it is moved back
to the failed state at-by any other process
in the system, uh, then the process
Pj would be marked as failed at everyone in the group, and if it's not actually failed then it may need to rejoin
the group, uh, once again. So to wrap up our discussion
of, uh, failure detection and membership, uh, failures are the norm
rather than the exception in data centers, uh, because
you have very large number of machines and processes
in a data center. And so every distributed system,
uh, needs a failure detector. Many distributed systems, in fact most use some form
of a membership, uh, service or membership, uh, algorithm running among the processes
or among the servers. Uh, we have seen, uh, how our
ring failure detection works, and this in fact underlies
several, uh, systems including the IBM SP2 and many other similar, uh,
small or medium sized clusters. You've also seen how gossip
style failure detection works, uh, and gossip style
failure detection is, uh, rumored to underlie, uh, Amazon web services
internal infrastructure. Of course this is only a rumor,
but at the least now you know how gossip style
failure detection, uh, works.