In this lecture, uh, we're going
to see some examples of, uh, applications
that use MapReduce. We'll work with, uh, fairly simple examples, but these will, these examples will hopefully show you, uh, the simplicity of programming in MapReduce, and yet, at the same time, how
powerful the paradigm can be. So the first application
is a distributed grep. You have a large set of files with a large amount
of text in them, for instance, uh, these might
be the works of Shakespeare, or in a production cluster these might be, uh, the logs
of, uh, uh, applications that are running, and you want to grep for,
uh, particular words, say of characters
in Shakespeare's works, uh, or, uh,
for error messages, uh, in, uh, your, uh,
production cluster. So essentially,
you may have a pattern which might be a regular,
uh, expression pattern or just a-a word
or a series of words, and you want to output all the
lines that match that pattern. So here's what, uh,
the Map would look like; um, here's how
you would write the Map. The Map essentially would, uh,
look at each line of text and, uh, check
if that line of text matches the supplied pattern. It might use regular grep
for this, and if it does, then it emits that line
of text as the key, with the value being, say, one, it doesn't really matter. The Reduce in turn, uh, simply
copies the intermediate data to the output. It does not do any processing, because each line, uh, essentially, uh,
might be unique, and you don't want to really do any merging of lines
in this case. And the output of, uh, this
particular MapReduce uh, uh, implementation is essentially
the set of lines that match your pattern. The advantage of doing
distributed grep here is that since you have
a very large data set, you could have multiple Map tasks and multiple Reduce tasks which speed up the processing
of your, uh, distributed grep, instead of doing a lot
of the grep on one machine, which might
be very, very slow, uh, because you have to sequentially process all the data, and also you may need
to transfer the data to that single machine. With MapReduce you could run
your, uh, application MapReduce distributed grep application
even though your data is distributed out over
multiple servers. The next application is
a reverse web-link graph. So you have a graph, uh, which is, say, a portion
of the web graph, where you have, uh,
edges (a, b) where a is a webpage
and b is a webpage, and a has a link
that points to b. This is represented, uh,
in the input as tuples (a, b), and that's what your input consists of. It is just pairs
of URLs, uh, (a, b) where ais a URL and b is a URL where the webpage at URL a
points to the webpage at URL b. The output you want
is the reverse. You want for each page, uh, all the list-the list of all
the pages that point to it, okay, so you want to find out
all the pages that point to, say, your homepage. So here's what the Map does. The Map processes the web log, and for each input pair
(source, target), (a, b) that it receives,
it just reverses it. It makes the target as the key
and the source as the value. Why does it do this? Well it does this so that
in the Reduce phase, all of, uh, the key/value pairs that share this target as the key will end up
at the same Reduce task, and that Reduce task in turn can simply list
the corresponding sources. It doesn't need to add them, because you can't
really add URLs. Uh, it just lists them,
makes a list out of the sources, and outputs that
as the key/value pair, or the final key/value pair. So this, ah, is essentially
the output where for each target and key/value pair the
corresponding value is the list of all the URLs that, um,
have pointed to it. Now you could take this a step
further where, uh, instead of, um, uh, listing, you could simply
add up the number of URLs. Okay, in this case, um,
you would output, uh, the number of pages that, uh, point to the target. In that case, you could also
optimize the map, uh, so that the, the, uh,
output of it is (target, 1). So that kind of dovetails
into our next, where, uh, you have, uh,
our next application where you have
a, um, uh, a say a log, which is a, uh,
log of accessed URLs, say from a proxy server, and there you have, uh, one URL for, uh, for every webpage that was fetched
by any client or user inside, for instance, your company
or organization. And you want as output
for each URL the percentage of total accesses for that URL, okay, so you want to say,
for instance, CNN.com accounted
for 13.5% of all accesses, uh, from this particular company, and so on and so forth
for every URL. So here's how the Map and
the Reduce would work. The Map processes the web log. Remember, the web log
has a series of URLs, and for each URL
that it encounters, it outputs
the key/value pair (URL, 1). The Reducers essentially, uh,
do the same thing as we did for the WordCount where each URL is
assigned to exactly one Reducer, and, uh, for that URL it sums up
the, uh, values that it, uh, receives as, um, values associated with that key. So at this point
we have output from, uh,
the MapReduce function, where for each URL
you have a count of the number of times
that URL was accessed. Okay, this is essentially
the WordCount example, but this is not
what we're looking for. We're looking for a percentage
rather than a count. So what you do is you chain
another, uh, MapReduce right after this. So you have the Map phase that
leads to the Reduce phase, and then after the Reduce phase
you chain another Map phase and another Reduce phase
after that, which will do
the percentage part. So the Map receives-receives
as input the output
of the previous Reduce phase, which is
the (URL, URL_count) pairs, uh, and it outputs
(1, the value) as its output. Why does it do this? Well, you just wanna have
one key so that you have
exactly one Reducer in that second
MapReduce phase, and it simply takes, uh, all of these key value pairs
it has received, it extracts the URL count,
it sums them up. Once it has summed them up, it knows the total number
of URL counts, uh, that are there
across all the URLs, and it makes
wa-one more pass, uh, through this, uh, uh, data set, and it divides the URL count
by the overall count, then it is calculated
and then it emits (URL, URL_count/overall_count) for each URL that is
present in its inputs. So this second reducer, uh,
second-phase Reducer, there is only one of it, because, um, you want
to calculate the overall count, right? You can't calculate
the overall count if there are multiple Reducers, and essentially
the Reducers and the maps don't talk with each other, uh, in this particular case, and you won't have
exactly one Reducer. And the Reducer does two passes; one pass to calculate the overall count by summing up all
the URL counts, and the second pass
to calculate the percentages by dividing all the counts
by the overall count. The last example
is, uh, one of sorting, and you might think sorting might be fairly complicated, um, but in fact, uh,
the internal MapReduce, um, uh, technique, uh, internal MapReduce,
uh, engine, uh, the Hadoop engine as well, uh, does some more
of, uh, sorting already, and this helps us right sort very, very easily. Concretely, the output
of the Map task, remember the output
of each Map task is a set of,
uh, key/value pairs, this set of key/value pairs
is already sorted before it is sent out
to the Reduces. This sorting is typically
a quick sort implementation in the Apache Hadoop implementation. For instance, the keys might be
integers or they might be words, and these are sorted uh, uh, based on increasing order
of integers or lexicographically
using the words. The Reduce task,
a given Reduce task, also receives a-a lot of input for multiple key/value pairs. It also sorts all of this input
before it starts its processing. This sorting
is actually fairly important for, uh, the Reduce task, because, uh, then, uh,
the Reduce task can decide, uh, basically once you sort the
key/value pairs by key, uh, all the sorting here
is done by key, uh, once you sort them by key, uh, essentially what happens is that all the key/value pairs associated with a given key are present contiguously
in your sorted, uh, set, and so you can call, uh,
the Reduce function once for that entire batch
of, um, uh, inputs, Reduce inputs that share the same key. So, uh, in order to sort a fairly large data set
in MapReduce, um, the input receives a series
of key/value pairs, and for the output you want to, uh, output
the set of sorted values. The Map function, uh,
that we would write would take the key/value pairs and it would simply output
value comma whatever as the key/value pair. We don't really care what the value here is
for the output key/value pair. Essentially this is
the identity function; it does not do any processing. Similarly, the Reduce
also does no processing; it just outputs
the same key/value pair. You might wonder
"How does this work?" Well, it works because the Map
output is already sorted using Quicksort, and the Reduce output
is also sorted using Mergesort, and so the output of,
uh, the Reducers, as long as the Reducers
are also sorted with respect to each other and you assign the file names for each of the Reducer
outputs appropriately, uh, you will get output
that is also, uh, sorted, um, based on the values. The only concern here
is one of partitioning. You cannot use hash-based
partitioning over here. You want to make sure
that the Reducers themselves are also ordered
so that their output- corresponding output file names can be given increasing um, um, uh, file names, uh,
in increasing order, and they can be
collated appropriately. So, uh, you want to partition
keys across Reducers based on ranges. In other words, you want
to assign each Reducer a range of keys, say Reducer number one gets, uh,
uh, keys 0 through 1,000, uh, Reducer number two gets, uh, keys 1,001 through 2,000, and Reducer number three gets keys 2,001 to-through 3,000 and so on and so forth. So, um, this again goes
into the partitioning function. Ah, in addition, the, uh, values may be, uh,
non-uniformly distributed, so there might be many more keys in, uh, the range say
2,001 through 3,000, so you may want to assign more
Reducers from that range. Okay, and so you want
to-you may want to take the data distribution into account in order to assign, uh,
while assigning ranges, uh, to the keys, uh,
to the, uh, Reduce tasks.