In this lecture, we will see what the gossip protocol
actually looks like. So once again,
you have a group of, uh, nodes in your
multicast group and you have one
multicast sender. Again, we consider
only one multicast message and only one multicast sender, but the same protocol
can be applied, uh, to multiple mulst-multicast messages being sent out, each by a separate sender. So you want to get
the multicast across to all the nodes in the group. So, uh, what happens through
the-eh-the sender is that periodically, say once every
five seconds or so, uh, the period can be adjusted but let's say five seconds. Uh, the sender picks b, uh,
targets at random and sends them copies
of the multicast message using what is known
as a gossip message. This gossip message
can be transmitted using the connectionless, uh, undereliable protocol, UDP, uh, and this works, uh, because gossip by itself, the overall protocol has a lot of reliability,
as you will see soon. Okay, so this b again-again
is, uh, is a gossip parameter. B, typically,
is a very small number, say b equals two is a typical, uh, value for, uh,
the, uh, gossip fan out. B is called a gossip fan out. Uh, and it does this periodly. So every five seconds, a sender
will send out, will select b, uh, nodes at random
from the group, and sends them copies
of the gossip. Uh, these are, uh,
these nodes are picked, uh, uh, with replacements so, uh, it's potentially possible that, uh, the same nodes
are picked multiple times to receive the gossip. What do receivers do? so once, uh, uh, a node
receives its gossip, it is said to be infected
by the gossip. And after it doe-after it
receives the gossip, after it's infected
by the gossip, it does the same thing,
uh, as the sender, meaning that periodically,
every say five seconds, it sends out, um,
uh, b copies of the gossip, of the multicast message, to, uh, each, to a randomly selected, um, gossip target. So here you notice that, uh,
the two red nodes that received the gossip
in the previous round, uh, are sending out gossips now and there might be nodes
that receive, uh, multiple, duplicate gossips that contain the same
multicast message. So, there is some amount
of wastage, over here. Finally, in this particular run, all the, uh, nodes in the group get infected by this uh, uh, gossip, uh, spread and they receive
the multicast message. So, in a sense, gossip is using a slightly higher
number of messages, i-in order to get
the gossip across but this has certain amount of, uh, benefit as
you will see soon. Uh, and the amount
of overhead involved- the increased overhead involved is not that much. So this is the epidemic or
the gossip multicast protocol, uh, in a nutshell. When a, uh, node, eh, receives, uh, the, uh, gossip
or the multicast message, it's said to be infected. Otherwise, it's uninfected. When a node turns from
uninfected into infected it starts periodically
sending out, uh, copies of, uh, this gossip, uh, message, uh, to b t-targets,
uh, selected at random. Once again, the gossip, uh, protocol itself is not synchronized across different, uh, nodes so each node would essentially be running
its periods of gossip completely independent of
the other nodes in the system. However, when it comes
to analysis, uh, typically we assume that the nodes run in, uh, synchrony, uh, because this helps to make the analysis, uh, um, easier and more tractable. However, that analysis
also applies when nodes are
completely unsynchronized and are running gossip,
uh, periods, uh, completely independently
of each other. So that protocol,
that I described, was actually a push,
uh, gossip protocol, where, once a node has received a multicast message, it then, turns infected and starts to gossip that message. If you have multiple messages
essentially, uh, you can gossip, uh, either each
message separately or you can gossip uh,
a set of messages together, perhaps a random subset
of the messages you received, or you could gossip
recently received ones, recently rec-recently
received multicasts, uh, because they are
more important. Or multicast messages might be
marked with a priority, and you always prefer
the higher priority messages and put those in the gossip, uh, uh, rather than
the lower priority messages. Again, there are variants of the gossip protocol
that I described that have each of these, um, uh, implemented in them. Now the reverse of the push,
is the pull based, uh, gossip protocol, where essentially instead of, uh, sending out gossips
only when you turn infected, you send out gossips
all the time, and the gossips don't necessarily contain messages, instead they contain, um,
uh, queries, uh, for, uh, messages that might
have been received, uh, since the last time
you gossiped. So, essentially, periodically you send out a gossip message, uh, to a few randomly selected nodes in the group asking, "Hey, have you heard
of any multicasts "since this last multicast
that I heard?" If they have, then they send you
copies of the multicast message. That's called a, uh,
pull based, uh, um, protocol. There are also, uh,
hybrid, uh, variants, uh, hybrid push-pull variants
of gossip where, in the initial query
when you have the pull, uh, message going out, um, the pull query going out, you also include some
of the recent gossip messages that you received, that makes it
a push-pull hybrid protocol. In the next lecture,
we'll be analyzing, uh, how the push
and the pull protocol, uh, work, how fast they are, how fault tolerant they are.