In this lecture we will see
how gossip-style, uh, failure detection works. Gossip-style failure detection
is essentially, ah, a variant of
call-to-all heartbeating which is more robust
than all-to-all heartbeating. Once again,
the basic concept is that every process, uh, wants
to send out it-its heartbeats to all the other processes
in the system. The heartbeats are again
incremented sequence numbers that are incremented locally. Processes timeout waiting
for heartbeats and mark the corresponding
sources as having failure. We want really good accuracy
properties here, which was lacking in the all
to all variant of heartbeating. So here is how gossip-style
failure detection works in a nutshell. Here I have an example
with, uh, four processes, uh, marked as 1, 2, 3, and 4. Every process maintains a table. Let's look at the table for 1, and the table for 1
shows, uh, four entries for each of the four processes
in the system. There are, uh, so, four rows. There are three columns. The first column is the address
and the process which is basically the ID. The second is
the heartbeat counter received from that corresponding process. Third is the local time at which that heartbeat counter
was last updated. So, for instance, at process 1, the row for 2 says that the last heartbeat that was received from process 2 at process 1
was numbered 10, 10, 3, and it was received when the
local time at process 1 was 62. The local time
is needed essentially because times
may be unsynchronized across different processes as we have discussed before, and this is an
asynchronous system after all, and so we wanna be using
the local time to mark when the heartbeat
was last updated. Periodically, each process
sends over this entire table to a few of its neighbors
selected at random. Okay, this is known
as, uh, gossip. So nodes are processes periodically gossip
their membership list. So, for instance,
if 1 selects 2 at random and sends it
its membership list, say 2's membership looks
like this, right. What 2 does when it receives
1's membership list is that it merges it
into its own list. It merges it row by row; so for instance,
it looks at row number 1 and it says that hey, my, uh,
latest for heartbeat for, uh, 1 is 10,118, but I am receiving a heartbeat
for 1 which is 10,120, which is later, and so I am going to update
that, uh, heartbeat to be 10,120. Also I am going
to update the, uh, time component of that particular row from 64 to my
current local time which happens to be 70
at this node. For the second row,
it doesn't update it because it has
a low- uh, a later heartbeat. After all it was
in row number 2. Uh, for the third row,
for node number 3, again it does update it, uh, because, uh,
1's incoming heartbeat, uh, table has a-a higher
heartbeat counter, so it becomes
10,098 inherited from 1, and the local time is marked
at 70 over here. Number 4 is not updated
because the heartbeat counters are the same here, uh, both at 1
and 2, so that's not updated. It is kept as is. Essentially this, ah, is
the way, ah, gossip works. Ah, the essential component here
is that, ah, 1, ah, periodically selects, um, uh, a few other members at, uh, random from its membership list and sends it copies of, uh,
its membership list and they do the protocol here. The timeout works the same way. If, ah, there is a threshold
typically for, ah, timing out and, um, when a-a particular row's, um, entry was last updated more than
that timeout, uh, seconds ago you mark that node
as our processes having failed. So the heartbeat
has not increased for more than T failed seconds. Notice that
this is a local time at the, uh, process that
is maintaining the table, then the member is marked
as having failed. However, you don't delete that
particular entry right away from the row, uh,
from the table that you have. Uh, you wait for another
T cleanup seconds. Typically cleanup is also
around the same as a T fail, and only after that
do you delete the member from your list. So why do we have
two different timeouts? Why not delete
the member right away? Well you could have, uh, this
very interesting phenomenon if you delete
the member right away where an entry
might never go away. Consider here
this particular scenario where process 1 has
an entry for 3 marked as, uh, a heartbeat 10,098
with local time 55 and process 2 also has a similar
heart- uh, entry for process 3. Process 1 marks- uh, sorry,
process 2 marks row 3 as having failed because
the current timeout is 75 and the T fail
is 24 seconds ago, so the timeout just elapsed; however, process 1, uh, has not
yet reached that timeout of 24 and so it has not deleted 3 yet, but 2 has gone ahead
and deleted 3. Soon enough 1 sends its
heartbeat list over to 2 and 2 sees the entry 3-
for 3 in there and says, "Oh, this is a new, ah, membership list entry. "I'm gonna add it back in. "And in fact,
I'm gonna add it back in "with the new local time,
uh, at node 2." And so essentially you can see
what's going on here, that after a while 1 will delete
the entry for 3, but 2 might select, uh, 1
as the gossip target and it might send it 3's entry and then 1 will add it back, and so because of this ping pong
behavior that happens, 3's entry might never,
ever go away from the system. So it is to avoid exactly this that you remember, uh, the entry for another T cleanup seconds typically the same
as T fail timeout and if you receive another entry
for the same, uh, process, you don't pay heed to it. You ignore it. So, let's go back
to the discussion of, uh, what happens
if the gossip period, uh, T gossip, is decreased. Um, so once again, uh,
the gossip property says that a single heartbeat, uh, takes
O(log(N)) time to propagate as long as you have
enough bandwidth, uh, to, uh, send out
the entire, uh, membership list, uh, every time, uh, you gossip. Uh, so, uh, N heartbeats take
O(log(N)) time to propagate and the bandwidth
allowed per node, ah, is allowed to be O(N). Uh, however, the bandwidth
allowed is O(1), you're allowed to send out
only a few sampled rows from your membership list, theyn the-then the, um, uh, then the, um, dissemination time might go up to Order(N-log(N)). Essentially this is, uh,
inversely proportionate. In the gossip period,
T gossip is decreased; essentially what happens, ah, is that you have
a higher bandwidth, uh, and that, uh, you spre-you send out gossips, uh, much quicker so you can have
a shorter timeout for the failure
detection itself. So essentially,
the T gossip is a tradeoff between bandwidth
and the detection time. Uh, the bandwidth again,
uh, um, determines, uh, um, the detection timeouts. The lower your bandwidth
limits are, uh, the longer y-y-your
detection time has to be. So I encourage you
to think about what happens if you have O(K) bandwidth
in, uh, this. Once again, if you increase
T_fail and T_cleanup, the timeouts there, what happens to the
false positive, uh, probability? Well essentially what happens is that your detection
time increases, but then at the same time, uh, you have a-a lower
false positive rate because you give,
uh, non-faulty nodes that are mistakenly detected slightly longer for the heartbeats
to make it across. So essentially you have
a bunch of knobs here. Uh, the T_gossip is one
of those knobs and the timeouts, the T_fail and the T_cleanup
are the other knobs, and the bandwidth constraints, uh, um, are the other knobs which help you to trade off between the false positive rate, uh, the detection time,
and the bandwidth that is, uh, used
by your gossip protocol itself. So in the next lecture
we'll see whether or not this in is in fact optimal. Is there an optimal
failure detector? How close d-do
the failure detectors we have discussed so far come
to this optimal, uh, amount?