In this lecture
we'll be discussing, uh, one of the algorithms for external synchronization
of clocks in, uh, uh, processes
in a distributed system, and this algorithm is called
the Cristian's Algorithm. All the processes, uh,
in the group synchronize, uh, their clocks with respect
to an external time server. So process P
would send a message to the external time server
saying, "Hey, what is the time?" When the server receives this,
it checks its local clock, finds the time t,
puts it into the reply message, and then sends a message back. When the process P receives
this message, it uses the value, uh, t in the message
to set its local clock value. So, what goes, uh, wrong
with that particular protocol? Well, by the time the response
message is received at P from, uh, the external server S, the time in external server S
has moved on, because the response message
takes non-zero time, uh, to make its way through
the network to the process P. And so process P si-time, uh, uh, is again
going to be inaccurate. It's gonna be behind,
uh, what, uh, process, uh, uh, the external server S's
current time actually is. Uh, and so the inaccuracy
in this algorithm is a function
of the message latencies. Uh, since latencies
are unbounded in an asynchronous system, this is a problem because now
this means that the inaccuracy in this algorithm
can also not be bounded. So, uh, what, um, uh, P does
to measure the accuracy, is it measures the round-trip
time of the message exchange which is, uh, the time between
when P sent the original message and between when, uh, it receives the reply. Okay, we call this set the RTT
or the round-trip time. And using this it can calculate,
uh, the, um, uh, uh, error in, uh, the clock value
that it sets. Okay, so suppose, uh,
we know the minimum P to S, uh, message transmission latency
let's call this as min1, and the minimum S to P, um, uh, transmission latency, which is min2
on the reverse path. What do min1 and min2 depend on? Well, min1 and min2 depend on, uh, the operating system overhead to buffer messages, uh, the TCP time
to queue messages, and any-any, uh, overheads
on the network path from, um, uh, S to P and P to S. If you don't know
what min1 and min2 are, you can just set them
to be zero, that's fine. But essentially this allows
you to incorporate any known minimum overheads
on the, uh, transmission pads into the, uh, error and account for them in the error, and retain a better
error bound, essentially. So using these, uh, uh, values
of min1 and min2, now P can actually
set its time to be better, uh, so that it has
a lower error, uh, and essentially, uh,
the actual time at P when it receives a response is somewhere between t+min2
and t+RTT-min1. You'll notice that RTT is
clearly greater than min1+min2. Why is it only
as small as t+min2? Well, uh, this would be the case
where the response message from S to P took
the minimum time, the min2 time to, uh, transmit across so the time at P when it
receives its message is t+min2. All right, so that's
the lower case. The upper case, t+RTT-min1,
occurs when the P to S message, the original
"what's the time" message took exactly min1 seconds
to make it across, which means that RTT- uh, uh, min1 was the time that,
uh, was taken by the response to come across. So in reality, the real time when, uh, P receives
a response message is somewhere
in-inside this interval. So, essentially what happens
in Cristian's Algorithm is that, uh, uh, that P sets its, uh,
clock to be halfway in between these two values. So essentially it sets
its, um, uh, clock to be, uh, t+, uh,
(RTT-min2-min1)/2. Okay, so it's halfway,
that's halfway between, uh, the extremes
of this interval. Well this means that, uh, the
error in this new clock value that has been set is, uh, half
the size of this interval, which is (RTT-min2-min1)/2. And this is, uh, kind
of, uh, convenient here, uh, the better you know
min1 and min2, uh, the lower is gonna be the error
on the, uh, clock value that you set. So, this means that the, uh,
clock error can now be bounded, and as you notice, it's a
function of the round-trip time. The longer your
round-trip time is, uh, the more is going
to be your error. So shorter round-trip times
mean, um, smaller errors in the clock value that you set according to the
Cristian's Algorithm. So, a few gotchas here. When you set your clock value, um, you're only allowed
to increase your clock value but you should never
set it backwards, um, uh, this is because you
always wanna makes sure that the events
at a given processes are or-are ordered linearly
with respect to each other. Okay, so you wanna
make sure that, uh, if your algorithm is telling you to set your clock backwards, you just retain
your current clock value and continue moving forward. You are, however,
allowed to increase or decrease the speed
of the clock, uh, depending on what's been
happening in the algorithm. So, for instance, if the algorithm has
consistently been telling you, every time you run it, uh,
to set your clock forward, you might want to just
tweak your, uh, clock speed to be slightly higher so that,
uh, you know, eh, so that, uh, perhaps you're better in sync
with the external source. Once again, uh, there is, uh, Cristian's Algorithm
does not specify necessarily a way to increase or decrease
the speed of your clock, but you're allowed to do this. You can increase
or decrease its speed as long as you do not set
your clock itself backwards. Now you might take multiple
readings and the errors or the round-trip times
may be very high. Uh, you can take multiple
readings and then average out, uh, the, um, RTTs that you get,
uh, over those multiple readings and use that
to set your, uh, clock time.