Uh, in this lecture we'll see
two very important properties that are, uh, desired
in distributed systems; these properties are called
safety and liveness, and along the way
we'll also discuss the kinds of, um, properties that, uh, the global snapshot
algorithm can be used to detect
in a distributed system. So correctness in distributed
systems is, uh, highly desired, and there are two properties
that can be used to, uh, specify
correctness requirements. These properties are known
as liveness and safety. Uh, the definitions
are distinct, uh, but they are often confused with each other, so its' very important for us
to be able to distinguish one from the other. Let's look at liveness first. Uh, in a nutshell, liveness is
a guarantee that something good will happen eventually, okay? Uh, eventually does not imply
a time bound, but if you let the-the system run long enough, then it-it guarantees,
uh, liveness. Uh, so examples of this, uh,
are, in the real world, uh, the guarantee that
in an Olympics 100 meter dash, at least one of the athletes will win the gold medal. This is a liveness
guarantee, something good, which is winning the medal,
happens eventually. Uh, a criminal
will eventually be jailed is a liveness guarantee that legal systems in many
countries, uh, try to guarantee. It's hard to guarantee it,
but it-it is a desired property. In a distributed system, uh,
the termination property is a liveness property. You want a distributed
computation-computation to terminate, and, uh, this is the, uh,
guarantee that something good, which is termination,
will happen eventually. Completeness and
failure detectors, uh, is a liveness property. This is a property
that says that eventually, every failure will be detected by the other non-faulty
processes in the system. In consensus, uh, liveness says that all processes eventually
decide on a value. Safety, on the other hand, is
a guarantee that something bad will never happen
in the system, okay? So notice that there we are
using "bad" instead of "good" earlier in the liveness, and we are saying
will never happen, uh, because we desire that it
never happens in the system. Again, in the real world, a
peace treaty between two nations is an example
of a safety property, uh, which guarantees that war will never happen
between those two nations. Again, this is
a desired property; this is not always what happens. Uh, wars have happened
in spite of treaties, um, so treaties are clearly
not safe all the time, but it's an example
of a desired safety property. Uh, legal systems try
to guarantee the safety property that an innocent person
will never be jailed; that would be really bad. In a distributed system, uh, the fact that we
do not want deadlocks in a distributed
transaction system is an example of a safety
property which we desire. The fact that we do not want
objects to be orphaned, meaning they don't have any
pointers pointing to them, is an example
of a safety property. Accuracy and failure detectors
is a safety property because it says that we do not
want any mistaken detections of non-faulty processes
being marked as failed. And in consensus, we do not
want two different processes to decide
on two different values, uh, because that would be bad and that would be unsafe. Uh, guaranteeing both liveness
and safety is very hard. In failure detectors
guaranteeing, um, uh, liveness and safety, which is
completeness and accuracy, is, uh, impossible in an
asynchronous distributed system, especially if you want these
to be time-bounded. Uh, in c-in the consensus
problem, uh, making decisions, uh, within a time bound and, uh,
correct decisions, um, uh, making sure that the correct decisions
are correct cannot both be guaranteed in an asynchronous
distributed system. You can guarantee
eventual liveness, which is what algorithms
like Paxos, uh, guarantee, but time-bounded liveness
cannot be guaranteed. And of course,
as many of us know, it's very hard for legal systems to guarantee both, uh, liveness and safety, and in fact to guarantee
either liveness or safety is very hard. Um, it's-it does happen that some criminals
never serve any jail time, and it also does happen
that innocents are jailed. So in the language
of global states; remember that
a distributed system moves from one global state
to another via causal steps, um, which you saw
in an earlier lecture in the snapshot series, uh, liveness with respect
to a property Pr in a given state S
essentially means that, uh, the state S satisfies Pr, and if this is,
uh, not true, then there is some causal path that goes from
the state S to another state S', global state S',
where S' would satisfy Pr. Okay, so all you require here
is that there is some way to get from the current state
to another state, um, that, uh,
satisfies liveness. If this is true for every state
that you are in, that whate-whatever state
you are in, you can reach another state that um, uh, that satisfies liveness uh, the liveness property Pr, then this system
is said to be satisfying the liveness property. Notice that you do not require
all the states, uh, reachable to satisfy this property Pr, just some causal path
and some end state to satisfy the property Pr. Safety, on the other hand,
with respect to property Pr, says that, um, in state S,
S satisfies the property Pr, and all global states S'
that are reachable from S via causal paths
also satisfy Pr. If this is true, then
the safety property is true. So how do we use
a global snapshot algorithm to detect global properties? Well, the snapshot algorithm can be used to detect global properties that are stable. When I say stable,
I mean properties that, once they are true, they st-they stay
true forever afterwards. Uh, these could be either
stable liveness properties or stable non-safety properties. A stable liveness property
might be of the kind the computation has terminated. Once a computation
has terminated, it stays terminated forever, and this is obviously
an example of a good property that we want to be true, so it's a liveness property
that is stable, and it can be u-and
it can be detected using the global
snapshot algorithm. Stable non-safety properties
include, um, uh, the fact that
there is a deadlock. Once a deadlock happens
in the system, it will stay forever until
you do something about it. Also, uh, once an object
is orphaned, uh, that is, it has no pointers
pointing to it, it will stay that way until you
do something about it. Both these are examples
of non-safety properties that are stable, and so the global snapshot, uh,
algorithm which we discussed, the Chandy-Lamport algorithm, can be used to detect,
uh, these stable properties. Uh, why can you use to dete- these to detect
the sto-stable properties? Because Chandy-Lamport algorithm is guaranteed
to be causally correct. Even though the Chandy-Lamport
algorithm does not, uh, guarantee that the snapshot
calculated by it holds at any physical point
of time in the past, it does guarantee
causal correctness, uh, which means
that it does not violate our, uh, human being's understanding of what happens causally
in the distributed system, and so it can be used to detect,
uh, stable properties. Wrapping up our discussion
of snapshots, the ability to calculate
a global snapshot is really important
in a distributed system, uh, but you
want to calculate the snapshot, uh, concurrently and parallelly while allowing the application to continue proceeding and sending
its application messages, and the Chandy-Lamport algorithm allows us to do exactly that. The output of a
Chandy-Lamport algorithm is a, uh, global snapshot
that obeys causality. In other words,
it satisfies a consistent cut, it's equivalent
to a consistent cut, and it can be used to detect
stable global properties which are either, uh,
liveness properties or non-safety properties. We've also discussed
two very important definitions, liveness and safety, which, um, are
relevant of course to the snapshot-
snapshots discussion. These are properties
that appear, uh, elsewhere and in other parts
of this course, uh, because these
are very important, uh, classes of properties that we desire
in distributed systems.