So, in this, uh, lecture, we'll analyze the push-based
gossip protocol that we discussed
in the previous lecture, uh, and I'll also touch a little bit on the analysis of the pull-based
gossip protocol. This analysis willshow
three claims. The first that, uh, the, uh,
gossip protocol is lightweight, even when the groups
are very large, meaning they contain
a large number of nodes, uh, it spreads a multicast
quickly, even in large groups, and it is highly fault tolerant in spite of, uh, node failures and in spite
of packets being dropped. So, the analysis here is, uh, derived from an old branch of mathematics called epidemiology, and this is taken from a, uh, well-known textbook on epidemiology by Bailey,
published in 1975. Um, essentially, epidemiology
was a old branch of mathematics that studied the spread
of epidemic diseases among prison populations and among human populations
in society. Uh, the-the traditional, uh,
classical version of epidemi-epidemiology analysis has a population
of n+1 individuals mixing homogenously. Essentially, each
of these individuals is one of the nodes
in our system and consider these individuals or these molecules being inside a jar and you're
constantly shaking the jar and these molecules
are moving around and hitting each other
all the time. The contact rate per time unit between any pair
of individuals is beta. So, beta's typically
a number between 0 and 1. Uh, this is the probability that two individuals will come
in to contact with each other during a given time unit. At any time, each individual
is either uninfected and there are
x such uninfected individuals, or once it turns infected, it stays infected and the
number of infected is y. Initially, only one infected, uh, individual is present. This is the multicast center,
so y_0=1 and the remaining, of, uh, the remaining n individuals
are all uninfected at time zero. Of course, at all times, because a-an individual is either uninfected or infected, the sum of x+y at any given
point of time should be n+1, the number of individuals
in the group. When an uninfected individual
comes into contact with any infected individual, uh, the uninfected individual
turns into infected and it stays
infected thereafter. So, this sort of models, uh,
the, uh, gossip-based protocol that we have seen so far. So, how do you analyze this? Well, this is
a continues time process and you can essentially write this as a differential equation where you write
the rate of change of, uh, x, which is the, uh, uh, uh,
uninfected, uh, number in the-in the system, um,
as -beta*x*y. First of all, it's negative
because the number of uninfected is obvious going
down over time. Uh, now, why is it, uh,
-beta*x*y? Well, x*y is the, uh, total number of potential infected/uninfected contacts per time unit, and among those, um, uh, all possible x*y contacts, only a fraction, beta, happen because beta is, after all,
the contact rate, and for each of those contacts, one uninfected
turns into infected. So, essentially that's gives you
the rate of change of x, and this is
a differential equation which you can replace y,
ah, uh, using x+y=n+1 and it becomes
a differential equation in just one variable and it
has the following solution. Uh, if you have your differential equation
charts with you, you might actually be able
to derive the solution. I encourage you to do this if you're familiar with differential equations. One of the things for you
to notice here is that, uh, x over here, the equation for x, uh, has, um, a t in it,
which is the time, which is the number of rounds since the gossip-based
protocol has started. Remember again that here we are
using a synchronous, uh, model where all the processes or nodes
proceed in lock step, uh, from one round to another. Uh, this is the only for the,
uh, ease of analysis. The analysis holds even if, the, uh, processes
are all unsynchronized. So, you notice
that as t goes to infinity, as t becomes very large, the denominator is going
to become extremely large and x is gonna go down to zero. Similarly, here,
when t becomes very large, this second, uh, uh, factor
in the denominator, uh, is, uh, going to go to zero,
and so y is gonna go to n+1. So, eventually
the number of uninfected becomes very close to zero and the number of infected
becomes very close to n+1, which is the total
number of nodes in the group. So, eventually gossip converges and everyone receives
the gossip. That's not surprising. Well, what we want to show is that gossip actually
converges fairly fast. So, this is our epidemic
multicast protocol and essentially,
this is what we're analyzing. So, in the gossip based and
epidemic multicast protocol, the value beta is actually b/n. Well, why is this? Consider a, uh,
an-an infected, uh, node and consider one particular uninfected node. The probability that
this infected node picks this particular uninfected node as a gossip target during the round is essentially the probability
that it is one of the b targets picked by the infected
node during that round. So, since there are n possible,
um, uh, uh, targets, uh, per round and the probability
that this uninfected node is picked as a gossip target, simply b/n. So, you substitute
this value beta into the equation
that we derived and you substitute
the value of t=clog(n) this essentially says that you
have, uh, n- uh, log(n) rounds that have happened so far and actually
all the log(n) rounds that have happened so far. And you substitute
in the previous equations, you get the number, uh,
of infected nodes in the system is n+1, the total number of nodes,
minus this quantity 1/n^(cb-2) This c comes
from the clog(n) here, and the b comes from, uh,
the fan out of the gossip. Now, if I set c to be some small
number like 2 and b to be
a small fan out like 2, this, uh, term becomes
1/n^(4-2), or 1/n^2. That's a very small number
that's very close to zero. Essentially what that's-
what that is saying is that after 2log(n) rounds, as long as I'm using
a gossip fan out of 2, the, ah, number of infected nodes in the system will be n+1 minus
a very small number, 1/n^2, which is very close to 0,
and in fact, as n increases, this number goes
even closer to 0. Essentially this is saying
that the gossip converges within a logarithmic
number of rounds and it gets very close to n+1
infected being in the system. So, as l- as long as you set c
and b to be small numbers that are independent of n, they are constants,
within clog(n) rounds. This means low latency,
all but a very small fraction of number of nodes receive,
uh, the multicast. This means that the multicast
is highly reliable and it gets to almost everyone with high probability within a logarithmic
number of rounds. And since only clog(n) rounds
have happened, um, nodes in the worst case
are sent out, uh, each node is sent out c*b*log(n) copies of the gossip message. So, the order, the, ah, overhead on each node
is also logarithmic. So, essentially this shows
the three claims that I have, uh, that I, uh, that I showed in the beginning of this lecture. It's reliable, it's low
latency, and it's lightweight. Now, I hope that
some of you are thinking, "Well, it's log(n),
it's not constant," right? Um, the latency is O(log(n)),
it's not constant, um, the overhead is O(log(n)),
it's not constant. But, why is O(log(n))
so sacrosanct? Well, log(n) is really not
constant in theory, but when it comes, uh,
to practice, uh, it is a very slowly
growing number. A log base 2(1000) = 10,
log base 2(1M) = 20, log base 2 (1B)~30, and if you consider the IP before address space, uh, log base 2(all IPv4 address)=32. So, these are
fairly small, uh, numbers, and as far as practitioners
are concerned, many practitioners
consider log(n) to be a fairly small, uh, number and a constant
for practical purposes. So, that was the push-based
gossip protocol, um, and, uh, the next thing that we need to show is, uh, the, uh, fault tolerance of the push-based
gossip protocol. What happens when
you have packet loss? Suppose 50% of the packets
get dropped, uh, from the network. Again, we can analyze
the protocol by simply replacing b by b/2 because, after all, uh, the gossip targets
are selectived at random, so even if you have,
um, uh, uh, uh, packet losses all over the network, uh, these packet losses
will be distributed uniformly at random among
the gossip messages. So, you simply analyze b by,
uh, nah, this, do the same analysis as before
by replacing b by b/2 because half the gossip messages get dropped, and it turns out, and you can check this
for yourself, uh, that to achieve the same
reliability as 0% packet loss, you only need to wait
for twice as many rounds. So, instead
of using clog(n) rounds, you wait for 2clog(n) rounds and you get the same reliability
as, uh, with a 50- as with the 0% packet loss rate. With node failure,
50% of the nodes fail, uh, you replace n by n/2 because there are
only half the nodes that are alive in the system, you care only about
the reliability at them, and you replace b
by b/2, ah, again, again, half the gossips
get dropped because they are sent
to one of the failed nodes. And once again, ah, you get
a similar, um, a result as, uh, before by increasing
the number of log- uh, the-the rounds by only
a constant factor- um, uh, multiplicative, constant multiplicative factor, you get the same reliability as if you had no node failures
in the system. So, with failures, one of the things that could
happen with the gossip is that it could die
out very quickly and this, uh, if it does happen, typically happens
very early in the gossip. Very early in the gossip,
if the sender, uh, before it sends out a copy of the gossip dies, then obviously you're not gonna get the gossip spread out anywhere. The sender might send out one
copy of the gossip, uh, to a few nodes in the system, just one round, and then all these, uh,
first round recipients and the sender byte might die. Okay, the probability
of this happening is very low because these
are selected at random, so even if you have gossip
running in a data center and an entire rack goes out, as long as one, um, er, process outside the rack got the gossip, you'd still have the gossip spread and it is very resilient. So, once the gossip has infected
a small amount of nodes in the system,
just a few rounds, after that it's very hard
to kill the gossip. And this is kinda,
should be familiar to you because this is uh, paralleling uh, the way in which
disease is spread in, uh, human populations or
rumors spread in society. Once a rumor of the disease gets
out, uh, a little bit farther, it's very hard to contain. Okay, so, all the analysis
that we've seen in the previous slides
is with high probability, and this has been shown
in another book, uh, by Galey and Dani, uh, which also analyzed, uh, gossip. Here again, um, here we are
using gossip or epidemics for a good purpose. Um, uh, the same behavior
is seen when rumors spread in society, infections diseases
spread in populations, or viruses and worms, uh,
spread, uh, on the internet. So, what about the
pull-gossip protocol? So far we have looked
at the push-gossip protocol, what about pull? Uh, in all forms of gossip,
whether it's push or pull, it takes O(log(n)) rounds
before the, uh, before, uh, about half the nodes
in the system get the gossip. Why is this? Well, uh, the best you can do is essentially build
a spanning tree among the nodes in the system, and if you have
a constant fan out, constant number of children per node in
f-in the spanning tree, it takes O(log(n)) rounds for
about half the nodes to get, uh, this, uh, uh, gossip message
in the best case. However, thereafter, after about half the nodes
have received the gossip, pull is faster than push. Yeah, how-to see this,
let's look at the following: After the ith round, let p_i be the fraction of noninfected or uninfected
processes in the system, then in the i+1 round, uh, the value of p_(i+1) is essentially (p_i)/(k+1) where k is the, um,
number of, um, k is the number
of, uh, gossip targets. K=b in this particular case. Why is this? Well, the probability that you
stay infected- uh, noninfected at the end of the i+1 round is the probability
that you were uninfected at the beginning
of the i+1 round, so that's p_i by itself, and also the probability that each of the k or b,
um, uh, targets that you contacted at random were all also uninfected
by the gossip, and that's, uh, times (p_i)^k, and that's how you get
(p_i)^(k+1). So, this goes around
very quickly, and in fact this goes around, uh, super exponentially, faster than exponential, and it can show
that this is O(log(log(n)), not just O(log(n)),
but it's O(log(log(n)), so it's much faster
than logarithmic. So, overall the pull gossip
protocol is still O(log(n)), but, ah, uh, it's much faster
in the second half. So, this should give you
an idea of getting, b-of designing, perhaps,
a push-pull hybrid protocol where you use push
in the beginning portion to get the gossip out
very quickly and then use pull, uh,
in the later rounds, uh, to, uh, um, uh, to-to get it out to everyone else
in-in the system very quickly. Finally, uh,
the gossip protocols that we've discussed
so far are not topology aware, so, uh, when it comes
to a hierarchical topology, whether it's, uh,
on the internet using subnets or whether it's on-in a data
center using, uh, racks, uh, the core switches
and routers might get overloaded
quite a bit. So, for instance,
consider a scenario where I have two subnets, perhaps two racks; uh, the top subnet
and the bottom subnet each with n/2 nodes, uh,
from the group. Since each node selects a gossip
target uniformly at random, about half the gossips are gonna go across from one subnet to the other, okay, and also from the bottom to the top. This means that
the router sees, uh, n/2, actually b*(n/2) gossips
go out per, uh, gossip period and so the load on the router is going to be O(n),
which is very, very high. So, the fix to this
is to do the following. You have gossip that, uh,
prefers nodes in your own subnet with a high probability and nodes outside your subnet
with a lower probability. If your subnet contains ni
or n_i, uh, nodes, you, uh, gossip, uh, um, uh, outside your
subnet with probablity 1/(n_i). With probability 1-(1/(n_i)), you gossip
within your own subnet. So, this means
that within your own subnet, because the probability
of gossiping is still very close to one, ah, it's gonna spread
in O(log(n)) time, and this is true
for any one of these subnets. And then after a subnet
has been completely infected, uh, since everyone gossips
outside with probability 1/(n_i) and there is n_i such nodes
gossiping outside, it takes O(1), uh,
rounds on expectation for the gossip to go across the
router to the other, uh, subnet and for someone in the other
subnet to get infected. After that, again, it's gonna take O(log(n)) rounds to spread within
that subnet itself. So, overall it's still O(log(n)) +, uh, O(1) + O(log(n)), uh, for it to get across and so it's still O(log(n))
rounds dissemination time, and instead what we have done is that we have re-reduced the
load on the router to be O(1). Why is it O(1)? Well, uh, because essentially
you have n_i nodes in the- in one subnet
and since each of them sends a gossip out
with probability 1/(n_i), the, uh, expected number of
gossips going through the router is (n_i*1)/(n_i),
which is O(1). So, that concludes our, uh,
analysis of, uh, gossip. Uh, in the next lecture
we'll see, uh, some practical permutations
of, uh, gossip. Uh, now, for those of you who
have been trying to analyze, uh, the push analysis, here is an addendum where the
analysis is actually shown out. Uh, I encourage you
to go through this, uh, and make sure that your analysis was, in fact, correct.