So today we'll see, uh, probabilistic failure detector that comes closer to the optima, as we have discussed
in the previous lecture. So this failure detector
is called the SWIM or Scalable Weekly consistent Infection style
Membership protocol. You'll see, uh, why it is called that in this lecture, as well as the next. Essentially here,
instead of using heart beating we use the reverse
which is, pinging. This is a concept that all
of you are familiar with. Process pi runs
the following protocol, which runs periodically
every T prime time units, that's called
the Protocol period. The beginning
of the Protocol period it picks one other process
at random, wa-call that process pj,
and sends it a ping message. If the process pj
receives a ping messages, it responds back with
a ack message immediately. If pi receives this ack then, it does nothing else for the remainder
of the Protocol period, it's satisfied. However, if it does not hear
back an acknowledgement, which might happen if the
acknowledgement is dropped or the original ping is dropped. Then, it tries to ping pj again, but, instead of using the direct path, it uses indirect path. It does this by sending
indirect pings to K other randomly selected processes. This, third process
is one of them. When it receives this
indirect ping, it then sends a direct ping,
uh, to pj, which responds back
with an acknowledgement, and then, uh,
a direct acknowledgement, and then the third process sends an indirect acknowledgement
back to pi. If pi receives at least one such
indirect acknowledgement, by the end of the protocol,
uh, period, uh, then, uh, it is happy
and is satisfied. If it does not receive either, direct acknowledgement
from the beginning or any indirect acknowledgements then, it marks pj as
having failed. So there're two things
going on here, first of all, pi is giving pj
a second chance to respond back to a ping, maybe the first ping
was dropped. That's why we have
the second stage, uh, also the pi to pj path
in the internet itself might be congested and might be dropping
more packets than other paths. So, pi uses other
internet paths, by using these indirect pingers, bypassing this
potential congestion, uh, and, uh,
giving pj a better chance of responding
with an acknowledgement. So, essentially, you're giving
a temporal chance to pj, uh, ah, by sending a second ping and also spatial chance to pj
by using indirect paths. So, where does SWIM lie with
respect to heart beating, I have two axis here,
on this, uh, plot. The Y axis, the vertical axis
is the first detection time. The X axis is the process load. Here we fix the false positive
rate and the message loss rate. For heart beating,
as you increase, when you have
a very low process load, another words, when you have a, a low bound on the bandwidth that can be used, the detection time
can be very high. If it is constant, a load,
that is your constraint, the detection time could be
as high as order N. On the other hand,
if your process load is order N then, your detection time
could be constant. Swim on the other hand,
gets both, a constant detection time
on expectation, as well as,
a constant process load. We'll see this
on the next few slides. So the detection time in SWIM is on expectation
e/e-1 protocol periods, this is a constant and
it's independent of group size. The load on each process
is a constant per period because each process
is sending out, one ping maybe, uh, another K indirect
ping messages and our expectation
is receiving, uh, one, um, direct ping and our expectation, uh, a few, um, uh, indirect ping messages. You can show by analysis that the load is in fact less than 8 times the optimal load, when you have 15% packet loss. The false positive rate, uh, that this protocol
achieves is tunable, by increasing K, you can lower the false positive rate and, uh, the false positive
also falls exponentially, uh, as the value
of K's increase up. Finally, you get completeness,
uh, when a process fails, it will eventually be detec-be, uh, be selected for pinging, as long as, there are any further processes with, uh, this failed process
in their membership list, this is the nice property about, uh, picking, uh,
ping targets at random. That, uh, when you have
multiple, uh, pingers, uh, eventually one
of them will pick you. Uh, but in fact,
the expectation is even better, uh, y'know, an expectation
you have e-1, e/e-1 protocol periods until at least one
of them pings you. You'll also see that you can deterministically
bound the time, uh, to pinging,
by using a trick, as you will see. So, because you have an expected e/e-1 protocol periods
until detection, you can show that, uh, within log in
protocol periods or order log in
protocol periods, uh, with high probability, uh, at least one, uh, process will ping
the failed process, and will mark it
as having failed. So, the probability mistake
is exponentially in -K, so as you increase
the value of K, uh, the probability
mistake falls. It also, depends on
the message lost rate, which we marked as, pml,
in the previous, uh, lecture. It also depends on the
probability of failure, uh, if you have many failures
in the system, then, the probability of mistake might, uh, go up, uh, essentially, because some of these indirect pingers might get affected. Uh, however, PM(T) stays,
uh, small and, it goes down
as K is increased. You can show that, uh, the load
in the worst case is, uh, 28 times, uh, less than 28 times
the optimal, uh, load, uh, and the expectation, uh, on expectation the load is less than 8 times the optimal load, when you have
15% packet loss rates, which are pretty high
for the internet, uh, but for the analysis,
uh, this is good. So let's see for a moment why it's e/e-1 protocol periods on expectation for being,
uh, for the failure detection. So, consider a process
that has failed, uh, what is the probability,
and assume that all the other, uh, processes in the system,
uh, are, uh, have this failed process
in their membership list. And each one of them
is picking one, uh, ping target, at random. The probability that, um, uh, this process will be,
the failed process will be, uh, picked as, uh, a target
by a given other process, pi, is 1/N. The probability that
it will not be picked as, uh, target by this, one of the process pi is 1-1/N. The probability that
it will not be picked as target by any of this other N-1
processes in the system is simply this quantity
raised to N-1 and the probability that
at least one of these, uh, non-value processes
will ping it, is just 1 minus this quantity. The second part of this
equation, is a well-known, uh, limit, as N goes very high, which is what we expect
in data centers. This value becomes e^-1. Essentially, what we
are seeing is that, in each protocol period, you flip a coin, with heads probability
1-e, uh, ^-1 and the coin turns up heads, then at least one other,
uh, process in the group is going to pick the failed process as a ping target and mark it as having failed. So, um, if you know
your probability theory than, basically, you'll know that it,
uh, takes an expectation, uh, one over... this quantity, 1-e^-1 number
of protocol periods f-on expectation for
the first heads to turn up. And that is why we get e/e-1. Also, as I mentioned before,
you have completeness, eventually, um, once a process fails, uh, um, uh, uh, at least one, uh, process will mark it, uh, will, uh, choose it
as a pinged target and in fact, eventually, every other non-faulty process that has this failed process
in this list, will pick it as a pinged target, because that's what you get with, uh, random picking. You can also remove, uh, you can also reduce
this eventual, uh, completeness to a time order completeness, which is order N rounds
in the worst case, by using a simple trick. The trick is as following, um, whenever you pick
a membership element, uh, you, uh, pick the next membership element in your list, in the linear fashions, so, essentially, you traverse the membership list that you have,
uh, one per around. When you reach the end of the
membership list, you simply, reorder and permute the membership list that you have. So, you essentially do
round robin pinging, along with random permutation after each traversum. So you can see, um, um, uh, if you think
about it, you can, uh, see that, this results
in 2N-1 protocol periods, in the worst case, before, uh, process is,
uh, picked as a pinged target, after it has failed. Uh, the worst case happens if, uh, the process has just been passed, in this round, in this round robin traverser and then after the permutation, uh, the process ends up
at the bottom of the list, uh, the very end of the list, that takes N-1+N,
uh, protocol periods for the pinging process
to get around and, and ping the failed process. Uh, this change of, um, uh, the way in which
ping targets are picked, uh, does not change the failure detection properties, such as, uh,
the false positive rate, and other
scalability properties. So far we've discussed,
uh, failure detection protocols, uh, but, uh, we need to return to the big picture of the group
membership protocol, um, and, uh, see how the dissemination component works, uh, in tandem with
the failure detection, uh, component
that we have seen so far.