So in this last lecture on the MapReduce, uh, uh, lecture series we'll see how MapReduce deals with, uh, failures. Uh, failures, as you know,
are very common, and the norm
rather than the exception in, uh, cloud
computing clusters. The most common failure is a failure of the server itself, uh, and the server failure might
need to, uh, lead to multiple, uh, components of the Hadoop
YARN scheduler failing. Remember that the servers are
running the node manager, uh, they're running tasks,
they're running, uh, one of the servers is running the resource manager, and also the Application Master might be running, uh, on a server for each job. So, uh, in order to deal
with server failures, there are heartbeats. The node manager, each
per-server node manager sends heartbeats,
periodic heartbeats, to the central resource manager. If a server fails
and these heartbeats stop, the RM times are waiting for the next heartbeat
from that node manager, and it knows the node manager has failed. It lets all the affected
application masters know, and the AMs, uh, then have the responsibility
of uh, rescheduling their tasks. The, uh, um, node manager also
keeps track of each task running at, uh, its server, so if one of the tasks fails, for instance, uh, due to an auto memory exception, then, uh, the task, uh,
is marked as idle, and, uh, either the node manager could restart it, or it could inform, uh, the resource manager or
the application master, uh, that, uh, the task has failed. Finally, the application master also sends
heartbeats periodically to the resource manager. If, uh, the AM fails
and the RM would restart the AM, which then syncs up
with, uh, its running tasks, and this might get complicated, uh, depending on how many tasks are running, uh, at the AM. The RM itself might fail,
and there is no one, uh, detecting the failure
of the RM, uh, so far. However, one way
to deal with this is to maintain a secondary, uh, hard backup, uh, RM, which, uh,
takes over immediately a-after the RM failure. Now the heartbeat messages that
I've described so far are also useful to send, uh, actual container requests and other, uh, requests. So these are, uh,
the container requests that we saw
in the previous lecture of this MapReduce series are in fact always piggybacked on top of the heartbeat messages, um, and this avoids sending
extra messages, uh, in, uh, the underlying network. This might lead to a smaller, more delay, uh, in sending
the next request across, because heartbeat messages
are sent only periodically. Uh, however, uh,
this, uh, does avoid extra communication overhead. Now, other than, uh, failures,
we might also have some nodes that are slow in, uh,
the, um, uh, cluster, uh, just because they
might be having slower CPUs or, uh, or, uh, uh, or, memory, or because over time these nodes
have, um, uh, incurred, uh, more failures
and have more errors in their-in their, uh, memory banks than other servers. In any case, this is problem
in, uh, in MapReduce because the slowest machine slows down their entire job. Why is this? Well, remember that,
uh, the, um, uh, Map phase has a bad ear
on the end of it, which means that none
of the Reduce tasks can start until all the Map tasks
are done, and this means that the slowest Map jo-the slowest, uh, Map task will slow down
the entire Reduce task. Similarly, the
slowest Reduce task will cause the job completion
time to be delayed even more. Remember, the job is not
considered to be completed until all of its Reduce tasks
are done. Okay, once again, uh,
this slowness may be due to a disk, maybe due to, uh,
network bandwidth being bad near that server, or maybe
to a bad CPU or bad memory. The way, uh, this is tackled
is by keeping, uh, track of the progress of each task. This is essentially
the percentage of input that has already been processed by that task, and, uh, for tasks
that are slow, meaning they have
a very slow progress rate, uh, by replicating them. The way this works is
suppose I have three tasks which are currently-
which had been started all at the same time, um, uh, and these are tasks one, two, and three of the same job, and suppose, uh,
these tasks have completion, uh, progress rates
of 90%, 50% and 10%. Clearly the 10% task
is in trouble, has been making
the slowest progress. What happens here is what is
known as speculative execution. And the MapReduce scheduler, uh,
in this case the AM, uh, might spin up another replica
of the task, number three, which has only a 10%
progress rate, but on a different server than where Task three is running. In essence now you have two
copies of the same task running, and because these
are identical copies and have identical inputs, they will generate
identical outputs, and they are racing
with each other; whichever one finishes fastest will lead to the task
being marked as completed. So the second replica of the-
of that same task number three, which we started on
a different server, gets lucky and finishes fairly quickly, then, uh, the first
replica will be killed, uh, and the task will be marked
as having completed. This is known
as speculative execution. Uh, it's a somewhat
misleading term, uh, because, uh, you don't really
speculate anything. Instead you look at the progress rate and you say, "Well, you know, uh,
the progress rate is slow for this particular task, and so
I'm going to, uh, replicate it." Uh, so really it should be
called replicated execution, but the technical term
is speculative execution. The final thing is locality. Um, so a cloud, uh, typically
has a hierarchical topology. For instance, a cloud
might have multiple racks, and communication inside a rack
is typically much faster than across racks, which goes
across the core switch. Uh, the file system
that is underlying, h-uh, MapReduce or Hadoop,
which might be GFS or HDFS, typically stores three replicas of each of the chunks or blocks. For instance, the blocks
might be 64 megabytes in size. Uh, typically these are
stored on two different racks. There might be two stored
on one rack, two replicas of the block
stored on one rack, and one stored
on a different rack. These are stored
on two different racks so that if one of the racks fails, for instance, the top of the rack
switch goes down, then you at least have one
copy of the file around, uh, or-or the block around. So given this, uh, MapReduce or
Hadoop attempts to schedule a Map task on preferably
a machine or server that contains a replica
of the corresponding input data, so that, uh, the input
to that task, this is typically a Map task, uh, would, uh,
be, uh, uh, fetched without incurring
any network overhead. However, this
may not be possible because all the servers on which-all the three servers on which this Map input
is located might already have all their containers, um, uh, full, meaning they're
already running tasks. In this case, the scheduler
tries to schedule, uh, the Map task on the same rack as a server
that contains the input. Uh, this has the advantage that
the inter, uh, the intrarack, or the inside rack
bandwidth can be used, which is typically much faster than going across racks, in order to transfer, uh,
the input block, and this is going
to be fairly fast, not as fast as running
on the same machine as where the data is, but faster than going across, uh, the core switch. However, this
may not be possible either, because all the servers
or all the racks where, uh, this input block is located
may be using up all of their containers. In this case, uh, the, uh,
MapReduce scheduler would then schedule
the task anywhere where a free container
is available. So essentially, uh, these three are, uh, orders
of, uh, preferring where to schedule a Map task. For scheduling Reduce tasks really, um, you don't have
much of a choice because you don't
really know up front where the data from these Reduce
tasks is gonna be coming from. Remember the data
for a Reduce task comes from one or potentially all
of the Map tasks in that job. Uh, and so typically you want
to schedule the Reduce tasks on the same racks as where
the Map tasks are scheduled uh, but in terms of which machines you want to prefer
in those racks, uh, you may want to prefer
at least those machines where Map tasks are scheduled but you, uh, really
don't know much about uh, which particular Map tasks you want to collocate your Reduce tasks with. So, uh, in summary, in this
MapReduce lecture series we have seen how MapReduce, uh, uses parallelization plus
aggregation in the Map phase and in the Reduce phase to schedule applications
across clusters. You have seen many examples of, uh, applications
that use MapReduce. There are many more out there, and, uh, there are many more
out there that are simple, there are many more out there,
uh, of applications that are fairly complex and have
chains of MapReduce, uh, jobs, one after another, and that leverage these chains, uh, to run fairly
complex applications. Uh, these applications need to schedule, uh, these
tasks across jobs, we have seen the Hadoop YARN scheduler at work, and they also need
to deal with, uh, failure. This is a fairly active area
of research, and there's been a lot of work in the last few years, uh, for both scheduling-efficient scheduling in MapReduce and in Hadoop, and also for fault tolerance
in MapReduce and in Hadoop, uh, and I would encourage you to look at a lot of this
literature that is out there.