[MUSIC] In this section, we're going to discuss another classical
algorithm called the bully algorithm. In the bully algorithm, all the processes
know the other processes ids and when a process finds
that the coordinator or the leader has failed it can find
this via the failure detector. If the process knows that it is
the process with the next highest id after the leader,
it elects itself as the new leader. And it sends a coordinator message
to all the processes that have lower identifiers than itself. At this point, the election is completed. This is why this is
called a bully algorithm. Essentially, if you know
that the bully has crashed. The highest-id process and
that you're the next highest id process, then you become the new bully and
you tell everyone else with a lower id that in fact you are the new leader and
the new bully in the system. However if you know that you are not
the next highest id process in the system, then you can't be the bully. You initiate election by
sending an election message. Whom you send an election message to? You send election messages to only
those processes that have a higher id than yourself. Essentially, you're trying to ask these
processes, hey, are you guys still alive? Are you guys willing to be the leader or
should I be become the new leader? If none of these processes responds
within a timeout then this initiator becomes a new leader
by becoming the bully and it sends a coordinator to
all lower id processes. At this point, the election is completed. However, if an answer is received within
our timeout called an OK message, then there is some non-faulty
process with a higher id and so this process needs to wait for
the coordinator message. Once again, if it does not receive
a coordinator message within a time out, it starts a new election run. What does the process do when
it receives an election message? Now, remember that an election message is
always received from a lower id process. When election message is received
from a lower id processes, essentially the lower id processes
saying hey, the leader has crashed. Here's a new election run being started. Should I be the new leader? And you need to tell the lower id process,
you need to bully the lower id process into not becoming the leader
by sending it an OK message. And OK message would suppress
the lower ID initiator and it would make it wait for you. When you see the election message,
if this is the first election message you're seeing you would need
to start your own leader election by sending election messages to
processes that have a higher id than you. And the protocol continues
until the highest id process is elected as the leader. So, let's see an example of this. Again, we have a system of six processes
N80 was the old leader, it crashed. And say, N6 is the lucky one in the group
who has detected the failure of N80. What it does is that it realizes
that it is not the next highest id process in the group. And so it needs to send an election
message to all the processes that have a higher id than itself. Which are essentially N80,
the failure process. Yes, it does send a message to
the failed process as well. It sends an election message to N32 and
also to N12. When N32 and N12 receive these messages
they know that they are in fact alive. And so they send back an OK message to N6, which then waits for
the final coordinator message. In turn, N12 and N32 also start
election messages of their own by sending election messages to
their higher id processes. So N12 send election messages to N32 and
to N80 and N32 sent an election message to N80. But N32 receives and towards election,
elected message, it sends back and OK and this suppressed N12 and makes it wait. N32 would time out waiting for N80s reply,
because N80 after all has failed and it would now know that
it is the new leader. It then sends a coordinator message to
all the lower id processes in the system, which is essentially is all the other
processes that are alive in the system. And at this point of time,
the election is completed. And there is a new leader and
everyone else knows about this leader. So you can also have failures that
happen during the election run, so N32 might fail after it has
sent the coord, after it has sent the election message, but
before it sends the coordinator message. And at this point of time, N12 and
N6 need to do something about it. Right? So essentially what happens is that N6 or
N12 will timeout waiting for N32's response and then it would create,
it would start a new election run, which would send a message to N12, which would
then start another election run by itself. And eventually,
N12 will get elected as the, as the new leader in this particular case. If N12 also were to fail then N6 would
also time out waiting for N12's reply. After N12's OK message and
then it would start the new election and then it would time out and then it would
finally become the leader in the group. So if failure stop in the system
eventually you do elect a leader. But if failures keep happening,
then you will never ever elect a leader. But how do you set these timeouts? How long do processes wait? Well, how long processes wait really
depends on the worst case time to complete election. The worst case time turns out to be
five transmission message times, if there are no failures during the run
and you can set your timer to be this. Why is it five message transmission times? Well consider the worst case, which happens if the election is started
from the lowest id server in the group. So the lowest id process in the groups,
a group initiates lead election. Once it sends the election messages out,
it receives OK messages, so the answer that the lowest id initiator
gets from the 2nd highest id process. That would be leader takes another
transmission time, so that's step two. Next, you have the election message from
the 2nd highest id server that goes out to the highest id process, which is,
in fact, the fair leader. That's a third message transmission time. Then the second highest
id process waits for the highest id process to respond and
there's a timeout for that as well. That's the fourth message
transmitting time. And then finally when the 2nd highest id
process realizes that it, in fact, has a, is a new leader, it then sends
a coordinator message to everyone. That's another message transmission time. Those who have looked at this for awhile, may realize that the steps two and
three can in fact be commingled. And the finally, where you can send OK messages to
the lower id processes, alongside. And finally, with the election messages
that you send to the higher id processes. And so you can,
in fact you can reduce this to be just four message transmission
times if you so wish. So the worst-case completion time is five
message transcription times, that deter, that determines the timeout. What about the number of messages that
are transmitted during this worst-case? Well the worst-case happens when
the process with the lowest id in the system detects a failure. It sends election messages to
all its higher id processes and all the N minus 1 processes start
an election protocol by themselves. So this means that the number of
election messages sent out by the high, highest id process is i minus 1. And so you have a total number of election
messages in the system that is equal to N, N minus 1 plus N minus 2 plus 1 and
so forth all the way plus 1. Okay.
There is a number of OK messages that is equal to each value of this minus 1, because the highest id fail
leader does not respond. But essentially the number of total
message is ordered off of this value. This turns out to be N minus 1 times N
divided by 2, which is order N squared. So the worst-case message
complexity is fairly bad. It's quadratic but at least you
have sharp turn around time for the protocol to complete. Well, that's the worst-case. What about the best-case? The best-case happens when the 2nd
highest id process in fact is one that detects the leader failure. It immediately knows that
it is the next high id, highest id of process in the group and
is the new leader. It simply sends out coordinator
messages to the remaining N minus 2 processes with
a lower id than itself. And so the completion time is just
one message transmission time. And the total number of messages
involved is N minus 2 messages. So what were the impossibility here? It seems like this protocol might
actually solve a consensus. however, since timeouts are built
into the protocol itself. This means the protocol
will never terminate, because liveness is not guaranteed. But it doesn't guarantee liveness in
synchronous system where the message delays maybe unpredictable and
processes maybe arbitrarily slow. However, in the synchronous system model
where processes have a maximum time to take an instruction step. And there's a maximum upper bound on how
long a message takes to be transmitted. You can actually calculate the worst one,
worst-case one-way latency as a worst-case processing time for the instructions plus
the worst-case one-way message latency. Using these you can set your time
outs to be the worst-case values and in fact you can, guarantee liveness in this way in the synchronize system
using bully election protocol. To wrap up our discussion
of leader election. Election is an important component of
many cloud computing systems today. We have discussed two classical leader
election protocols ring-based and bully. But they are failure-prone,
because after all, leader election is related to consensus. Which turns out to be impossible to
solve in an asynchronous system. Many systems in industries,
such as Google Chubby as well as Apache Zookeeper which is an open source
system use Paxos-like approaches or quorum like approaches in order to do
elections, which guarantee safety. They may not guarantee liveness, but they
guarantee eventual liveness if things go right in the system in terms of
message losses and failures. And then,
the then the election succeeds and everyone knows about the unique
leader that is elected in the group. [MUSIC]